---
source_file: Ng_2025_Opportunities,_challenges_and_school_strategies.pdf
conversion_date: 2026-02-03T09:11:10.836217
converter: docling
quality_score: 95
---

<!-- image -->

## Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence

## Opportunities, challenges and school strategies for integrating generative AI in education

<!-- image -->

Davy Tsz Kit Ng a,* , Eagle Kai Chi Chan b , Chung Kwan Lo a

<!-- image -->

- a Department of Mathematics and Information Technology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
- b Division of Integrative Systems and Design, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: Artificial intelligence Generative AI Teacher education Learning/teaching School improvement School policy School management

## 1. Introduction

Generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) has emerged as a disruptive technology with the potential to education by offering new opportunities for personalized learning, content creation (e.g., images, audio, videos), data analysis, and program code generation (e.g., Chiu, 2023; O ' Dea  et  al.,  2024).  Artificial  intelligence  (AI)  often  mimics  human cognitive  functions  such  as  learning  and  problem-solving  by  using human-designed  rules  to  analyze  data,  interpret  inputs,  and  achieve specific goals (Siemens et al., 2022; Ng et al., 2024). GenAI is a type of AI technology that automatically generates content in response to prompts in natural-language conversational interfaces (UNESCO, 2023). Its core are pre-trained large language models (LLMs) that use vast datasets from the Internet, social media conversations and other databases and sources to produce human-like contents in various conversational formats based on natural language inputs (Yan et al., 2024).

The differences between traditional AI and GenAI are significant. Laviola et al. (2024) pointed out that not all AI is created equal. The differences are categorized across six dimensions: data sources,

* Corresponding author. E-mail addresses:

A B S T R A C T

The increasing accessibility of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) tools has led to their exploration and adoption  in  education.  This  qualitative  study  investigates  the  opportunities  and  challenges  associated  with integrating GenAI in education, and the strategies that encourage teachers and students to embrace GenAI in school settings. We recruited 76 educators in Canada to participate in a professional training seminar about GenAI and expressed their views through online surveys. Through written reflections, an optimistic outlook on GenAI ' s role in education was identified among the teachers, and some discipline-specific ideas were proposed. Thematic analysis reveals three key practices of AI implementation: teaching/learning, administration and assessments. However, three major challenges are also identified: school ' s readiness, teachers ' AI competencies, and students ' AI literacy and ethics. Teachers suggest several strategies to motivate GenAI integration, including professional development, clear guidelines, and access to AI software and technical support. Finally, Singh ' s Teach AI Global Initiative Guidance and Socio-ecological Model are adapted and proposed to support schools in becoming AI-ready by addressing teachers ' and students ' needs, facilitating organizational learning, and promoting improvement and transformation to foster their literacy development. Recommendations were provided for developing effective strategies to embrace GenAI in education.

responses, interactivity, contextual understanding, task completion, and technical requirements. First, in terms of data sources, traditional AI typically relies on structured data from predefined datasets and historical  data  to  make  decisions,  often  resulting  in  rule-based  responses grounded in programmed logic and trained patterns (Ng et al., 2024). In contrast,  GenAI  utilizes  vast  amounts  of  unstructured  data  from  the Internet and other diverse sources to produce human-like responses in various formats such as text, images, and videos. While traditional AI usually depends on pre-programmed responses, GenAI tends to be more interactive,  facilitating  conversational  exchanges  and  enabling  more personalized responses based on user prompts. Furthermore, traditional AI often struggles with understanding context beyond specific parameters, whereas GenAI exhibits more advanced contextual understanding, interpreting  nuanced  language  and  generating  contextually  relevant responses (Samala et al., 2024). In terms of task completion, traditional AI  is  effective  at  handling  well-defined  tasks  like  data  analysis  and automation, while GenAI excels in more complex problem-solving, often generating solutions that were not explicitly programmed. Lastly, the technical requirements for developing traditional AI solutions

davyngtk@eduhk.hk (D.T.K. Ng), kcechan@connect.ust.hk (E.K.C. Chan), chungkwanlo@eduhk.hk (C.K. Lo).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

necessitate  a  deeper  understanding  of  AI  concepts  and  programming skills,  along  with  upfront  configuration,  including  data  labeling  and model  training.  GenAI  requires  other  competencies  such  as  critical thinking skills and prompt engineering techniques to fine-tune its responses,  allowing  for  more  accessible  setup  and  engagement  (O ' Dea et  al.,  2024).  As  such,  unlike  traditional  AI,  GenAI  learns  from user-inputted responses (e.g., data and prompt), and adapts its behavior based on discovered patterns, creating content that resembles human-generated  outputs  (Borah  et  al.,  2024).  Table  1 displays  the differences between traditional AI and GenAI.

The  literature  review  section  first  reviews  the  opportunities  and challenges  associated  with  GenAI  in  education,  and  discusses  how teachers apply GenAI for teaching/learning purposes. Second, schools consist of diverse stakeholders (e.g., school leaders, teachers) who hold varying views towards GenAI. The second part will review the perceptions of these stakeholders regarding the impact of GenAI technologies on  education  based  on  prior  research.  Finally,  the  third  section  will examine existing school strategies that can promote the development of AI-ready schools.

## 1.1. Opportunities and concerns of using GenAI in education

Recent reviews have identified numerous opportunities and concerns for integrating GenAI, particularly ChatGPT, in education. For example, Levin  et  al.  (2024) provided  empirical  evidence  from  19  studies demonstrating its usage in assessments, suggesting that similar GenAI applications could enhance knowledge acquisition across subjects. Lo (2023) examined 50 articles and identified ChatGPT ' s potential as both an instructional assistant and a virtual tutor, tailored to diverse educational  needs. Vargas-Murillo et al. (2023) emphasized its capacity to streamline student learning processes, and prevent the over-reliance on AI outputs. Zhang and Tur (2024) asserted that ChatGPT can empower educators in curriculum development  and  personalized learning, although concerns about academic integrity and content quality must be addressed. Lo et al. (2024) emphasized the role of ChatGPT in fostering students ' emotional, behavioral, and cognitive learning engagement by reviewing 72 studies. ChatGPT fosters positive feelings, satisfaction, and enjoyment  among  students.  By  facilitating  AI-student  interactions,  it

Table 1 Differences between traditional AI and GenAI.

|                          | Traditional AI                                                                                                   | GenAI                                                                                                                                        |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Data sources             | Relies on structured data from predefined datasets. Typically uses historical data to make decisions.            | Utilizes vast amounts of unstructured data from the Internet and other sources to generate new content.                                      |
| Response                 | Tend to offer rule-based responses based on programmed logic and trained patterns.                               | Generates human-like responses in conversational formats like images, texts and videos.                                                      |
| Interactivity            | Depends on how users pre- program its responses; often operates in a reactive manner based on user input.        | Highly interactive, allowing for conversational exchanges and adaptive learning based on user prompt.                                        |
| Contextual understanding | Often struggles with understanding context beyond predefined parameters; relies heavily on specific user inputs. | Exhibits advanced contextual understanding, capable of interpreting nuanced language and generating responses that consider broader context. |
| Task completion          | Effective at completing specific, well-defined tasks (e. g., data analysis, automation).                         | Excels at creative tasks and complex problem-solving, often generating solutions or content that were not explicitly programmed.             |
| Technical requirement    | Requires AI knowledge, technical skills, upfront configuration, including data labeling and model training.      | More critical thinking skills and prompt engineering techniques to fine-tune and access GenAI ' s responses with less initial setup.         |

enhances participation, effort, study habits, task completion, and encourages students to self-regulate and invest more time in their assignments at home. Additionally, it  improves  students ' understanding of knowledge and their self-perception.

Roles  of  GenAI. GenAI  is  implemented  into  various  educational roles to enhance teaching and learning. For teachers, GenAI can serve as an instructional co-designer by assisting teachers in developing learning materials such as presentation slides, worksheets, and lesson plans. For example,  Cooper  (2023) explored  how  ChatGPT  can  help  educators create  learning  rubrics  and  quizzes.  Another  study  conducted  by Moundridou et al. (2024) examined its potential to enhance learning content creation, assessment, and activity design within inquiry-based learning frameworks. Additionally, ChatGPT acts as a valuable educational evaluation tool, offering insights and diverse perspectives to make arguments and statements (Herbold et al., 2023). Educators can assign roles to GenAI  to explore narratives from various perspectives (Ryazanov et al., 2025) and generate survey questions to gather student feedback (Jansen et al., 2023). For students, GenAI serves as a tutor to provide personalized guidance, adapting to individual student needs. For instance, Gayed et al. (2022) highlighted ChatGPT ' s effectiveness as a writing assistant in English language education to enhance students ' performance and reduce their language barriers. GenAI can also serve as a project tool, teammate and expert, offering feedback and resources that are useful for project-based learning (Zheng et al., 2024). It can provide recommendations for students ' projects and reinforce students ' practical  skills  and  knowledge  application.  Other  researchers  view GenAI as language tutors (Lo et al., 2024), and learning companions that support  students ' learning  motivation  and  self-regulated  learning  in science education (Ng et al., 2024).

However,  it  is  crucial  to  acknowledge  the  limitations  of  GenAI, including  its  inability  to  understand  real-world  contexts  and  the  potential inaccuracies in its outputs (Chiu, 2023), and However, it also presents challenges, such as a potential reduction in critical thinking skills and an overreliance on AI. While it may generate fluent responses, students with a solid grasp of the subject are better equipped to identify errors. Ethical considerations, such as responsible use of AI-generated content  and  maintaining  academic  integrity,  must  also  be  addressed (McDonald et al., 2024). Furthermore, biases inherent in the training data can lead to perpetuating stereotypes in educational content. Successful integration of GenAI in the classroom necessitates that school educators and students develop the skills to utilize these tools effectively (Chiu,  2023),  including  fostering  new  ideas  and  creating  diverse  examples. As discussions around GenAI evolve, it is essential to prioritize ethical principles alongside its technological potential for school students  through  AI  literacy  courses  (Kong  et  al.,  2024).  These  courses equip students with essential competencies to understand the fundamental principles of AI, use AI responsibly, evaluate its recommendations critically, and create AI-related artifacts (Ng et al., 2021). While GenAI can facilitate teaching/learning, it is vital to critically evaluate AI-generated resources and adapt them to specific contexts. It is supported  by  recent  studies  like  Authors  (2024)  who  emphasized  the importance of assessing the usefulness of ChatGPT ' s explanations and verifying sources rather than relying solely on AI responses. Another study conducted by Zhang and Tur (2024) also pointed out the need to evaluate ChatGPT ' s recommendations so that educators could examine the accuracy, contextual relevance, and potential biases in AI-generated contents.

## 1.2. Perceptions towards GenAI

The  integration  of  GenAI  in  education  has  garnered  increasing attention among various stakeholders in the educational ecosystem. This section of the literature review explores the perceptions of teachers and school  leaders  toward  GenAI  and  its  implications  in  the  educational context.

Educational leaders, including principals and school directors, play a

critical role in driving educational change and fostering a supportive environment  for  technological  integration  (Roth &amp; Price,  2016,  pp. 195 -213).  To  implement  AI  in  education,  their  perceptions  towards GenAI  are  instrumental  in  shaping  school  policies,  fostering  teacher basic competencies, and creating a culture of innovation (Chan &amp; Hu, 2023). Studies indicate that educational leaders perceive GenAI as a transformative force that can enhance student engagement, personalized learning, and instructional effectiveness. They recognize the potential  of  AI  tools  to  support  teachers  in  delivering  differentiated instruction, facilitating data-driven decision-making, and making policies (Wang, 2021). However, concerns related to accessibility of GenAI infrastructure,  and  related  school  policies,  and  teacher  professional development in GenAI implementation have also been raised (Knight et al., 2023).

Teachers, as frontline implementers of educational practices, hold valuable  insights  into  perceptions  of  GenAI.  Research  suggests  that teachers ' perceptions of GenAI are diverse and influenced by various factors. Some teachers view GenAI as a tool that can enhance instructional delivery, automate their routine administrative tasks, and provide personalized learning experiences. They recognize the potential of AI in adapting  instruction  to  individual  student  needs,  promoting  critical thinking skills, and facilitating real-time feedback (Chen et al., 2020; Kohnke et al., 2023). Moreover, GenAI can enhance learning assessments by enabling self-assessments, automated grading and providing instant feedback, enabling teachers to focus more on individual student growth (Yang et al., 2024). Additionally, it can analyze student performance data to identify learning gaps and patterns, helping educators tailor their interventions more effectively (Jaboob et al., 2024). However, other teachers may express concerns about the impact of GenAI on their professional autonomy, the potential for replacing human interaction, and the need for adequate training and support in integrating AI tools effectively (Rudolph et al., 2024). Teachers ' perceptions of GenAI are shaped by their pedagogical beliefs, technological readiness, professional development opportunities, and the alignment of AI integration  with their instructional goals (Moorhouse &amp; Kohnke, 2024; Yan et al., 2024).

Overall,  the  perceptions  of  school  leaders  and  teachers  towards GenAI in education are multifaceted. While there is generally an optimistic  outlook  towards  the  potential  benefits  of  GenAI,  concerns regarding  privacy,  equity,  and  professional  development  need  to  be addressed  to  ensure  a  successful  integration  of  AI  technologies  in educational  settings.  This  study  examined  teachers ' perceptions  to determine  whether  the  situation  in  Canada  aligns  with  the  current literature.

## 1.3. School ' s readiness to bring AI into education

In general, GenAI is claimed to be useful; are schools ready to adopt this? To become AI-ready schools, strategies need to be implemented. According to the UNESCO (2023) ' s guide, schools should develop and implement frameworks and guidelines to facilitate responsive and creative use of GenAI in several ways: (1) Developing an ethical framework to support teachers and students in using GenAI responsibly, ethically, and  critically  to  validate  the  outputs;  (2)  Providing  guidance  and training  to  ensure  teachers  and  students  are  prepared  to  use  GenAI, including prompt engineering and understanding potential biases such as data privacy and intellectual property; and (3) Detecting plagiarism in written assignments through the use of various GenAI tools. As such, clear  guidelines  and  policies  need  to  be  established  to  ensure  the responsible use of GenAI in educational settings, addressing issues such as plagiarism, bias, and data privacy.

Other studies also suggest the importance of curriculum integration and professional development. Curriculum integration plays a crucial role in incorporating AI-related concepts and effectively utilizing GenAI skills  across  various  subjects,  equipping  students  with  the  necessary knowledge and understanding of the ethical implications behind, and critical  thinking  in  the  context  of  GenAI  (Yang,  2022).  Moreover,  to prepare teachers to become ready, professional development programs are essential to train them in using GenAI tools wisely, understanding their  capabilities  and  limitations,  and  developing  effective  teaching strategies that leverage the potential of GenAI (Yue et al., 2024). By adopting these strategies, schools can foster a digital learning environment that embraces GenAI, preparing students for an AI-driven future while maximizing the benefits and minimizing the challenges associated with this transformative technology.

Most current discussions have focused on higher education, leaving the  integration  of  GenAI  in  high  school  settings  relatively  underdiscussed. Schools may not have the necessary resources or readiness to effectively adapt to the changes brought about by GenAI. Additionally, compared to university students, elementary and high school students  may  require  more  guidance  and  support  when  incorporating GenAI into their learning due to their potential lack of self-regulation (Yan et al., 2024).

A research gap exists in the lack of empirical studies investigating how GenAI has transformed school education. Therefore, this qualitative study aims to explore how teachers perceive and adopt GenAI in school education and suggest strategies for schools to create a positive AI-ready environment, as viewed by school teachers and leaders. Some research questions are as follows.

RQ1: How do teachers ' perceptions of GenAI vary across different subjects and experience levels, and what perceived opportunities do they associate with its use?

RQ2.  What  challenges  and  concerns  do  teachers  perceive  when integrating GenAI in their schools?

RQ3.  What  school  strategies  do  teachers  suggest  to  embrace  the integration of GenAI in their schools?

## 2. Preliminary framework for analysis

Recent scholars have started developing preliminary frameworks for integrating GenAI in education. For example, Chiu (2023) proposed an initial  framework  consisting  of  four  dimensions  (learning,  teaching, assessment,  and  administration)  to  examine  the  impact  of  GenAI  on practices, policies, and research directions in education. The framework employed ChatGPT and Midjourney as case studies. In this study, RQ1 adopts this Chiu (2023) ' s model to examine Canadian teachers ' thoughts and perceptions towards GenAI usage in terms of perceived opportunities and concerns. After that, RQ1 also presents teachers ' perceptions according  to  their  subject  disciplines.  Regarding  RQ2,  this  study employed the socio-ecological model (Singh et al., 2023) to investigate the challenges and concerns encountered by teachers during the integration of GenAI in their schools. The model inspires us to highlight three themes, which encompass meso and micro perspectives. Furthermore, RQ3 investigates effective school strategies for integrating GenAI. As for RQ3, drawing inspiration from Sigh (2023) ' s Teach AI Global, this study adopts the framework to inform how schools should be prepared to become AI-ready. The framework encompasses three dimensions: (1) developing guidance and policies that address the specific needs of the school,  (2)  facilitating  organizational  learning,  and  (3)  promoting continuous improvement and transformative practices to enhance both teachers ' and students ' AI literacy.

To summarize, this study designed an initial framework based on three frameworks: Chiu ' s (2023) four-dimensional model, the socio-ecological  model,  and  the  Teach  AI  Global  Initiative  Guidance (2024).  These  frameworks  introduced  three  major  themes  and  nine sub-themes  that  corresponded  to  the  three  RQs  in  a  coding  table (Appendix 1). They provided an initial framework for data collection and analysis in this study (Fig. 1).

## 3. Research methods

## 3.1. Participants

This study employs a qualitative research design to gain an in-depth understanding  of  teachers ' reflections  regarding  the  integration  of GenAI in the classroom. Qualitative methods are well-suited to explore emerging phenomena and capture the richness of participants ' experiences and perspectives (Tracy, 2024). It aims to identify the opportunities,  challenges,  and  school  strategies  to  integrate  GenAI  in  the classroom from the perspectives of teachers.

This  study  invited  hundreds  of  teachers  from  twenty  schools  to complete an online qualitative survey after attending a teacher education  seminar  about  AI  education  in  Canada.  There  are  hundreds  of participants. At the end, 73 teachers and 3 school leaders (including a principal,  director  of  instructional  innovation,  director  of  athletics) voluntarily completed the survey. The demographic information of the teachers is displayed in Table 2. The seminar provided training for educators to learn what AI and GenAI are, the working mechanisms, and the  ethical  concerns  behind  them.  The  participants  shared  their

Table 2 Demographic information.

| Items                                              | Number   | Percentage   |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------|--------------|
| Gender                                             |          |              |
| Male                                               | 43       | 56.6         |
| Female                                             | 33       | 43.4         |
| Years of teaching                                  |          |              |
| More than 10 years                                 | 46       | 60.5         |
| 6 - 10 years                                       | 18       | 23.7         |
| 1 - 5 years                                        | 10       | 13.2         |
| Less than 1 year                                   | 2        | 2.6          |
| Professional teacher training related to AI        |          |              |
| Yes                                                | 48       | 64.5         |
| No                                                 | 28       | 35.5         |
| Experience in using AI in education                |          |              |
| Yes                                                | 35       | 46.1         |
| No                                                 | 33       | 43.4         |
| Not sure                                           | 8        | 10.5         |
| Major subjects taught                              |          |              |
| English and second language                        | 15       | 20.3         |
| Mathematics and science                            | 12       | 16.2         |
| Arts, social studies and humanities                | 12       | 16.2         |
| Computer science and technology                    | 11       | 14.9         |
| Others (e.g., business, sports, agriculture, food) | 9        | 12.2         |
| Perhaps not to say                                 | 15       | 20.3         |
| School management without teaching subjects        | 2        | 2.7          |

Fig. 1. Initial framework for this study.

<!-- image -->

experiences in adopting GenAI in their teaching/learning, administration, and assessments in the seminar.

For example, a teacher participant shared how to use ChatGPT to provide useful recommendations via prompting to improve students ' design of mobile applications in computer lessons. Teachers also discussed how they adopted GenAI in teaching and administration, and the challenges and concerns behind it. They then shared how schools and governments could support them to integrate GenAI into their schools. This study used two stages to collect the participants ' views. After asking about  teachers ' demographic  characteristics  and  their  prior  understanding of GenAI, some open-ended questions were asked to investigate staff ' s readiness and concerns when integrating AI into education. The self-reported survey was expected to be completed within 30 min.

## 3.2. Instruments

The instrument in this study was designed to address specific aspects related to teachers ' perceptions of integrating GenAI in the classroom. In the self-reported survey, some open-ended questions (e.g., What factors would encourage you to integrate AI into your teaching practices?) were asked. Data will be collected through written reflections, which allow for  open-ended  exploration  of  participants ' perceptions,  experiences, and insights. The survey consists of four sections. First, teachers ' demographic  information  was  collected  to  learn  about  teachers ' background,  including  educational  roles,  teaching  experience,  gender, subject  area  expertise,  and  familiarity  with  technology  in  education. This section aims to establish a profile of the participants and provide contextual  information  for  data  analysis.  Then,  the  survey  assessed teachers ' general understanding of AI and its potential applications in education. The survey explored teachers ' awareness of existing AI tools or  platforms  in  education,  and  their  perception  of  the  benefits  and concerns associated with AI integration.

In  the  second  section  (RQ1),  teachers  shared  their  perceptions  of GenAI in their daily work in terms of perceived opportunities and concerns. They responded to questions such as what aspect of AI in education  has  caught  their  attention  or  raised  concerns  in  their  daily teaching practice. Furthermore, they provided insights on the challenges and concerns they perceive when integrating GenAI in their schools. In the third section (RQ2), they were asked about their foresight regarding the future role of AI in education and how they think it will impact teaching and learning. They were also prompted to express any concerns they have regarding the integration of AI in education. In the fourth section (RQ3), the study focused on investigating the school strategies that teachers suggested for embracing the integration of GenAI in their schools.  The  questions  aimed  to  elicit  teachers ' insights  and  recommendations on effective approaches for incorporating GenAI into their

educational institutions. This helps gather teachers ' perspectives on how schools can successfully integrate GenAI into their daily practices.

## 3.3. Data analysis

To analyze the data, the first two authors were responsible for categorizing the written data. Inductive thematic analysis was adopted, and patterns of similar meanings were grouped into themes based on the research questions. Initially, a process of familiarization with the data will  be  undertaken  by  reading  and  re-reading  the  transcripts.  Then, initial codes will be generated to identify patterns, themes, and categories within the data. These codes will be refined through an iterative process, and themes will be organized into a potential framework. The analysis involved comparison and discussion among the first and second authors to ensure reliability. Initially, 440 data points were collected from  teachers ' reflections  for  familiarization,  initial,  and  subsequent coding. Corresponding text segments were then categorized according to the  coding schemes for each research question. The first and second authors independently coded 29.5% of the data (130 responses from 22 teachers) before calculating the Kappa coefficient. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen ' s kappa coefficient, yielding a score of 0.78, indicating good agreement (Watkins &amp; Pacheco, 2000). The findings will be presented using descriptive and interpretive approaches, supported  by  quotes  from  participants.  Subsequently,  Monkeylearn  software  was  deployed  for  further  analysis.  This  software  is  specifically designed for qualitative sentiment analysis and utilizes textual analysis models to automatically tag data, including sentiment and key ideas (Sadriu  et  al.,  2021).  Based  on  the  teachers ' written  reflections,  key themes were identified and categorized according to Appendix 1.

Ethical approval was sought from their schools to ensure the protection  of  teachers ' rights  and  confidentiality.  Informed  consent  was obtained  from  all  participants  at  the  beginning  of  the  survey,  and teachers could feel free to withdraw from the survey at any time without consequences. Participants ' identities were anonymized during the data analysis process.

## 4. Results

## 4.1. Teachers ' perceptions to adopt GenAI (RQ1)

In this study, it was identified that 35 out of 76 teachers had started to adopt GenAI in teaching/learning, administration, and assessments, and 41 of them had not started using GenAI in education. A total of 48 teachers  (63%)  claimed  that  they  had  received  some  professional teacher training related to AI before, and learnt the basic concepts of AI. However,  only  32  teachers  (42.1%)  feel  confident  using  AI  in  the classroom. The overall sentiment analysis conducted by Monkeylearn on teacher responses, revealing that 57.4% of the feedback was positive.

## 4.1.1. Perceptions between teachers with and without experience in using GenAI

In the survey, 57 teachers (75%) reported having used AI tools, while 19 teachers (25%) indicated that they have not. This section displays how  they  perceived  GenAI  usage  differently.  The  overall  sentiment among teachers who have used GenAI is 64% positive, while those who have not used it report a more neutral sentiment of 50.8%. Teachers who have not yet used GenAI tools claimed that they know the opportunities that these technologies could bring to education, such as ' enhancing personalized  learning  experiences ' , ' automating  specific  tasks ' and ' enhancing second language learning ' .

For teachers who haven ' t used GenAI before, they tend to have more concerns compared with those who have experience in it. Fig. 2 displays the  common  concerns  that  are  raised  by  teachers.  First,  one  of  the greatest concerns is the lack of technical support and teacher training. A teacher  claimed, ' I  feel  unprepared  to  use  GenAI  in  my  classrooms, though I know what AI can do. More teacher training and successful cases are essential so that I can apply GenAI to support teaching in my subject area. ' Another teacher agreed on this, ' I had taken courses to learn what AI is. However, it needs other technigcal and pedagogical knowledge to enable me to bring AI meaningfully in the classroom. ' This aligns with another concern raised by teachers that they claimed to be struggling with adapting their teaching methods. A teacher said, ' Second, privacy and data security concerns are prevalent, with fears about potential  breaches  or  misuse  of  student  data  by  service  providers.  A teacher expressed, ' I ' m quite worried that I ' m not sure if the AI software keeps my data secure. ' Additionally, concerns about academic dishonesty have emerged, with some educators believing that reliance on AI tools could increase instances of cheating or plagiarism. One teacher stated, ' I  am concerned this will result in more illegal and dishonest behavior on the part of students. ' Another teacher said, ' I need to check for  plagiarism.  However,  there  are  grey  areas  of  what  "counts"  as plagiarism.  I  worry  about  plagiarism.  Will  we  foster  a  generation  of cheaters? ' Lastly, there is apprehension that over-reliance on AI might hinder students ' critical thinking, creativity, and information literacy skills,  as they could become dependent on AI for generating answers rather than developing these essential abilities themselves. A teacher noted, ' Students will over-rely on AI and reduce their critical thinking, information literacy, creativity, and problem-solving abilities. '

## 4.1.2. Opportunities of GenAI: teaching/learning, administration and assessments

Regarding the perceived opportunities of using GenAI in education, teachers ' qualitative responses were coded according to their feedback in  three  categories:  teaching/learning  (P1),  administration  (P2),  and

Fig. 2. Concerns raised by educators regarding the use of GenAI in education.

<!-- image -->

## assessment (P3).

Teaching/learning  (P1). Teachers  have  found  various  opportunities  and  ways  to  integrate  AI  tools  into  their  lesson  planning  and development. Many educators have mentioned using AI tools to enhance their lesson preparation. A teacher claimed, ' ChatGPT and Magic School provide me with a great experience. When I input prompts, GenaI gives me  excellent  recommendations  for  lesson  planning  and  preparing teaching materials. ' These tools are valuable resources for generating innovative learning tasks, developing rubrics, and tailoring instructional progressions to meet the unique needs of their students. For example, an art teacher stated, ' AI tools aid in providing a list of artists for an art movement and supporting the exploration of lesson plan ideas. They also enable students to describe a painting using different art styles. '

Education administration (P2). AI tools also facilitate teachers in their educational administration. Teachers have found ChatGPT particularly helpful in summarizing key points of articles, writing proposals,  and  generating  suggestions  for  report  card  comments  and reference  letters.  When  asking  how  GenAI  facilitates  their  everyday work, a teacher said, ' GenAI is able to support my teaching evaluation, lesson  planning,  assessment,  report  writing,  proposal  and  school  notices. ' These  tools  provide  valuable  assistance  in  generating  ideas, improving writing quality, and serving as a starting point for various written tasks. A teacher also suggested, ' AI can help automate administrative tasks and free up their brain power to generate more higherlevel and engaging teaching ideas. ' Another teacher expressed, ' GenAI can streamline many routine tasks such as written communications  and  notices,  organize  and  summarize  data  for  reports,  meeting notes, and documents ' . This enables teachers to work more efficiently and frees up time to focus on higher-level and strategic responsibilities. Further, GenAI can assist with analyzing data, identifying trends, and generating  insights  to  inform  educational  management  decisions. Teachers can leverage these capabilities to produce data visualizations, evaluation and reports, and inform strategic planning.

Assessments (P3). GenAI has the potential to facilitate personalized learning assessment. For example, a teacher claimed, ' GenAI can provide  personalized  assessments ' guidance  tailored  to  each  student ' s needs,  prompts  and  learning  progress.  With  teachers ' inputs,  it  can automatically  generate  some  feedback  content  based  on  students ' strengths  and  weaknesses ' .  Another  teacher  said, ' Teachers  can  use GenAI to generate examination questions and reports according to students ' needs and their prior performance. ' Second, GenAI can automate the grading process for certain types of assessments. This saves teachers time by providing quick feedback to students and generating test/examination reports according to students ' performance. A teacher suggested, ' The difficulty level and content of assessment questions can be adjusted based on the student ' s responses. ' This approach ensures that students are challenged appropriately, and their abilities are accurately measured. Another teacher said, ' I can provide a rubric to GenAI and ask it  to  automatically give feedback and recommendations for students ' assessments to facilitate their learning progressions ' .

## 4.1.3. Perceptions between teachers with and without experience in using GenAI

Teachers revealed some subject-specific perceptions of integrating GenAI in their subjects.

English and second language. Language teachers recognized the potential of using GenAI for proofreading, elaborating, refining grammars, consolidating arguments and sentence structures, and enhancing creativity. However, teachers expressed concerns about students misusing these tools. They worried that over-reliance on AI technologies like ChatGPT and Grammarly may hinder the development of students ' writing abilities. A teacher said, ' Students might over-rely on these tools for brainstorming and elaborating sentences, which can prevent them from expressing their ideas and constructing sentences throughout their language learning processes ' .

Mathematics  and  science. Although  mathematics  and  science teachers shared similar concerns about students over-relying on GenAI to generate working steps and solutions, they seem to be more oprtimistic towards the potential of GenAI to obtain learning feedback. A teacher  claimed, ' ChatGPT  assists  students  in  their  mathematical learning  by  providing  guidance  and  steps  that  deepen  their  understanding of the material. When they encounter difficulties, they can seek help from AI. ' Another teacher stated, ' Students may sometimes resort to copying the steps and answers provided. Still, students can ask AI relevant questions to enhance their understanding and advance their learning. '

Social  studies  and  humanities. Social  studies  and  humanities teachers view GenAI as a valuable tool for enriching discussions, facilitating research, and promoting critical thinking. A teacher noted, ' We can encourage students to generate different AI personas and interview GenAI  to  explore  various  stakeholders ' viewpoints. ' However,  these educators  express  concerns  about  ethical  considerations,  particularly regarding  the  accuracy  of  AI-generated  content  and  the  necessity  of verifying information. A teacher said, ' Students may become lazy and not do fact checking in their projects. '

Computer science and technology. Computer teachers tend to be more prepared to use GenAI and focused more on developing students ' AI literacy and problem-solving skills. For example, a teacher said, ' I consider AI as valuable tools for coding and debugging. It helps make programming more accessible ' . At the same time, they recognized the ethical  implications of  AI,  emphasizing  the  need to  educate students about responsible use, data privacy, algorithmic bias, and automation ethics.  Additionally, a teacher claimed, ' My school was planning for some AI literacy trainings that encourage students ' critical evaluation of AI outputs, and enable them to understand foundational AI concepts and know how to use GenAI responsibly and effectively ' .

## 4.2. Concerns of integrating GenAI into schools (RQ2)

This finding aligns with the socio-ecological model for integrating GenAI in education. This model underscores the importance of strategies that span from meso-level policies to micro-level practices: (1) school ' s readiness in terms of policy and management (C1), (2) teachers ' readiness and AI competency (C2), and (3) students ' readiness and AI literacy (C3).

School ' s readiness (C1). In terms of school policy and management, teacher  training  and  effective  management  of  AI  tools  can  be  challenging. Keeping up with the rapid advancements in AI and ensuring proper utilization of AI tools in the classroom requires ongoing training and support. The absence of clear policies and guidelines regarding the appropriate use of AI in education can create uncertainty and challenges for teachers in implementing AI tools effectively. A teacher claimed, ' My main concern is that my school doesn ' t seem to be embracing change. There are no AI policies for us to follow. ' Another teacher also supported this idea and said, ' The lack of well-defined policies and guidelines for the  ethical  usage  of  GenAI  in  education  can  lead  to  uncertainty  and difficulties for us when implementing GenAI tools. '

Teachers ' readiness and AI competency (C2). Teachers ' readiness could be a great concern. One challenge teachers may face is a lack of professional  development  programmes  and  training.  Acquiring  the necessary skills and knowledge to integrate AI tools into their teaching practices  effectively  can  be  difficult  without  proper  support  and training. A teacher said, ' Teachers may face challenges in acquiring the necessary practical applications and knowledge to integrate AI tools into their teaching practices effectively. ' Another teacher noted, ' The technical support from the school is insufficient. Teachers may have challenges when using this new technology and choosing appropriate tools. ' Additionally, adapting to new teaching methods required for integrating AI  can  be  challenging  for  educators  accustomed  to  traditional  approaches.  A  teacher  claimed, ' Integrating  AI  may  require  a  shift  in teaching methodologies, which can be challenging for educators who are accustomed to traditional approaches even if they know what AI is. '

Some teachers may be resistant to adopting AI technologies due to unfamiliarity  or  reluctance  to  change  established  teaching  methods.  A teacher suggested, ' I would like to see further discussions at my school regarding  whether  teachers  should  use  GenAI  in  classrooms. ' Some teachers suggested advocating for accessible resources for their teaching.  A  teacher  proposed, ' Our school could subscribe  to  licenses  for various  AI  applications,  allowing  us  to  evaluate  and  select  the  most suitable tools for our students. ' Many AI applications require subscription fees, and teachers prefer that schools cover these costs.

Students ' readiness  and  AI  literacy  (C3). Even  when  teachers become ready to adopt GenAI, there are concerns that students ' AI literacy  levels  may  not  be  sufficient.  First,  concerns  about  academic integrity arise with the use of AI tools. This is supported by a teacher, who claimed, ' The use of AI tools  raises  concerns  about  plagiarism, cheating, and the potential for students to rely solely on AI-generated content  without  critical  thinking  or  independent  learning. ' Second, students may not know how to question the accuracy and reliability of information  provided  by  AI  systems,  particularly  in  terms  of  factchecking  and  the  sources  of  information.  Therefore,  promoting  AIrelated information literacy has become crucial. A teacher said, ' Students need to question the accuracy and reliability of learning materials and recommendations provided by AI systems, particularly in terms of fact-checking and the sources of information. ' Third, over-reliance on AI can also lead to a decrease in human interaction and social skills among students, which is also a concern for some educators. A teacher reflected, ' My concern is that students may use AI without critical evaluation or a clear  purpose,  which  could  hinder  the  development  of  their  critical thinking and analytical skills. It is important to ensure that their skills in critical analysis are properly nurtured and developed. '

## 4.3. Strategies that encourage teachers to embrace GenAI integration in schools (RQ3)

In teachers ' reflections, they emphasized the significance of several school strategies to support the integration of AI in education: (1) professional development (S1), (2) clear guidelines (S2), (3) accessibility to AI  software,  and  technical  support  to  facilitate  teachers  to  integrate GenAI  in  education  (S3).  These  factors  would  empower  teachers  to leverage the potential of AI and enhance the learning experiences of their students.

Professional development (S1). Teachers expressed a strong desire for professional development opportunities. They recognized the need to acquire more knowledge and skills related to AI and its integration in the classroom. Professional development programs would enable teachers to stay updated with the latest advancements, learn effective strategies for integrating AI, and understand the potential benefits and drawbacks. Teachers also highlighted that they could learn from case studies and examples of successful AI integration in various educational contexts. These examples would serve as inspiration and guidance for teachers, enabling them to adapt and implement similar practices in their classrooms. For example, a teacher wrote, ' I would like to learn more about any  tools  or  approaches  that  can  help  me  ensure  that  students  are completing their work themselves, rather than relying on AI to do it for them. ' Teachers also suggested in their reflection: ' more professional development opportunities ' , and ' more use cases to help me facilitate my school document preparation process, assessment creation, and auto marking in my subject discipline '

Clear  guidelines  (S2). Teachers  emphasized  the  importance  of having AI education policies and frameworks that outline the ethical considerations, usage guidelines, and effective practices for integrating GenAI in educational settings. These guidelines would provide teachers with a sense of direction and help them navigate the challenges associated with AI integration. A teacher suggested, ' Schools need to revise their assignment and academic integrity policies to incorporate the use of  AI,  and  consider  it  as  a  part  of  the  self-regulated  learning  and reflection process. '

Accessibility to AI software, and technical support (S3) . Teachers expressed the need for schools to provide them with access to reliable AI tools and platforms that are specifically designed for educational purposes. Furthermore, having technical support readily available would assist teachers in effectively using AI tools and resolving any technical issues that may arise. Some teachers stated in the survey, ' more accessibility of various types of GenAI tools, ' and ' knowing how to use and having the technical support ' .

## 5. Discussion

This discussion section synthesizes the findings from RQ1 to explore teachers ' perceptions of GenAI usage, revealing insights into their attitudes, concerns, and experiences with this technology in the classroom (5.1). Building on these insights, a socio-ecological model is proposed that  fosters  meaningful  collaboration  among  stakeholders,  including educators,  administrators,  and  policymakers,  to  ensure  a  holistic approach to integrating GenAI in school settings (5.2). Practical guidelines  are  established  for  creating  AI-ready  schools,  emphasizing  the necessary infrastructure and support systems (5.3). To further enrich this discussion, we incorporate a global perspective on government and school policies related to GenAI implementation (5.4). In this section, we adopte a labelling approach to indicate how results in Section 4 support the discussions.

## 5.1. Teachers ' perceptions of using GenAI in education

According  to  RQ1,  thematic  analysis  reveals  that  experienced teachers are generally more optimistic about the benefits of GenAI. In contrast,  teachers  lacking  experience  often  emphasize  apprehensions about the reliability and ethical implications of AI tools. This disparity suggests that familiarity with GenAI greatly influences teachers ' attitudes and concerns. Moreover, the percentage of teachers reporting an understanding  of  general  AI  concepts  is  higher  than  those  who  feel confident  using  AI  in  the  classroom.  This  indicates  a  significant awareness-implementation  gap  between  theoretical  knowledge  and practical application. This emphasizes the need for professional development and training to bridge this gap effectively.

Second, most existing studies have focused on students ' perceptions of how ChatGPT aids in achieving their learning goals and evaluating its benefits (Shoufan, 2023; Vargas-Murillo et al., 2023). In contrast, our study emphasizes teachers ' perceptions, aligning with previous findings that view GenAI as a valuable assistant. Teachers reported that GenAI helps reduce their workload (P2), produce interactive content (P1), and improve  the  writing  quality  of  their  materials  (P1).  Additionally,  it supports teachers in developing innovative learning experiences, conducting evaluations, and designing learning plans, grading rubrics, and quizzes (P1, P3). Furthermore, GenAI can assist educators with tasks such as curriculum development, proposal preparation, and providing immediate feedback to students (P1, P3). It is essential that schools need teacher professional development and evidence to support an informed approach to AI adoption.

Third, most current discussions surrounding GenAI usage in education  are  not  subject-specific;  most  studies  either  examined  students across various disciplines or did not specify the subject areas at all (Lo et  al.,  2024).  Our  findings  in  Section  4.1.3 helped  contribute  to  the understanding of teachers ' subject-specific perceptions, and aligns with current findings. For example, language teachers can use GenAI tools to enhance students ' writing quality, promote personalized learning, and facilitate  their  critical  thinking  through  generatiing  coherent  and well-structured content. Mathematics teachers can enable students to use GenAI for generating steps and solutions to learn related concepts (Egara &amp; Mosimege,  2024).  Science  and  social  science  teachers  can leverage AI to assist students in conducting inquiries, extracting relevant information  from  the  internet,  and  summarizing  findings  (Wu  et  al., 2024).  Further  efforts  are  needed  to  propose  strategies  that  can  be

tailored to different learning contexts and subject disciplines.

According to RQ2, many teachers are aware of potential biases in AI, yet few have concrete strategies to mitigate these risks (C2), highlighting a gap between awareness and action. For instance, educators express concerns that young students may misuse tools like ChatGPT to complete  homework  without  fully  understanding  the  learning  material, which could negatively impact their foundational knowledge and cause learning/cognitive laziness (C3). This misuse not only hinders students ' development of critical thinking skills but also raises issues of academic integrity and responsible AI usage in education (C3). This aligns with Mittal et al. (2024), who emphasized the challenges of detecting misuse in learning assessments and the necessity for young learners to grasp fundamental  concepts  rather  than  simply  generating  answers  using GenAI. However, teachers may lack knowledge of effective safeguarding measures to address these risks (C2). Furthermore, ChatGPT can produce inaccurate information, generate biased content, and lead to academic  dishonesty  through  overreliance  on  AI-generated  responses, which align with existing studies (Goedde et al., 2023; Lo, 2023). Its limitations  in  contextual  understanding  and  reasoning  can  further impede students ' development of critical thinking skills (Wu et al., 2024; Zhang &amp; Tur, 2023). Therefore, it is essential to build strategies tailored to different educational contexts and subjects that enable teachers and students to critically evaluate GenAI content.

Overall, our findings reveal a worrying situation that while teachers are optimistic about AI ' s potential, they face challenges in fundamental areas  such  as  student  privacy,  safety  and  ethical  use.  Many  teachers reported that their schools lack established AI policies and guidelines, and they expressed low confidence of using GenAI in the classroom, and concerns about privacy, critical thinking and learning laziness when it comes to safeguarding students while using AI tools.

## 5.2. The socio-ecological model

To  synthesize  RQ2,  the  socio-ecological  model  is  adopted  in  this study to help integrate GenAI in education from meso-level policy to micro-level practices (Singh et al., 2023). This model, is aligned with research  like  Aizawa  and  Rose  (2019) and  Schoon  and  Lyons-Amos (2017), clarifies the interactions between personal and environmental factors, and is useful for implementing GenAI policies in schools (O ' Dea et al., 2024). The model enhances contextual relevance and empowers stakeholders  to  influence  the  use  of  GenAI  in  education.  Effective implementation necessitates careful planning to ensure that the integration of GenAI is ethical, effective, and responsive to the needs of both students and educators. Although this study does not primarily focus on the macro level, Section 5.4 provides insights into global perspectives on GenAI in education, drawing on national guidelines and policies.

At the meso level, school leaders play a crucial role in this integration. As suggested by RQ2, establishing clear policies, guidelines, and standards is essential for ensuring ethical practices, data privacy, and responsible  AI  use  (C1).  Although  the  findings  in  this  study  do  not explicitly  mention the co-design approach, Zheng et al. (2024) highlighted it as a collaborative strategy that school leaders should promote. This encourages collaboration among universities, AI experts, and other schools to share effective practices and address common challenges of using  GenAI.  Co-designing  approaches  can  facilitate  the  meaningful implementation of GenAI into classrooms. Research and development efforts with universities should focus on evaluating the impact of creative  AI-empowered  instructional  models  on  learning  outcomes,  and exploring related ethical frameworks (C1). Furthermore, implementing ethical review processes is vital for assessing risks, ensuring compliance, and addressing ethical concerns associated with AI projects. Continuous monitoring  and  evaluation  will  be  essential  for  gathering  feedback, assessing the effectiveness of GenAI integration, and making necessary adjustments in response to the evolving landscape of AI in education. Finally,  financial  support  is  necessary  to  provide  adequate  tools,  resources, and infrastructure for both teachers and students, especially since most GenAI tools require subscriptions or licenses.

Moreover, RQ2 focused primarily on students and teachers as the primary  end-users  of  GenAI  in  learning  and  teaching.  For  instance, training is recommended to raise AI literacy and awareness, promoting responsible AI use (C2, C3). However, teachers ' discussions have rarely included the involvement of parents. As suggested by Su et al. (2023), parents play a crucial role in understanding school policies and supporting the use of GenAI in their children ' s learning. Engaging parents in these discussions enables schools to create a supportive environment where they are informed about how AI is utilized in their children ' s education,  allowing  them  to  actively  participate  in  their  learning journey. This collaborative approach among educators, students, and parents  is  essential  for  fostering  a  comprehensive  understanding  of GenAI and its responsible use in educational settings. Fig. 3 displays the proposed AI education policy implementation at the macro, meso and micro levels.

## 5.3. A proposed guidelines for building an AI-ready school

To reflect on RQ3, inspired by Teach AI Global Initiative Guidance (2024), this study summarized teachers ' opinions into a framework to support schools to become AI-ready in three dimensions: create guidance  and  policies  to  address  school  needs,  facilitate  organizational learning,  and  promoting  improvement  and  transformation  to  foster teachers ' and student ' AI literacy.

Create guidance and policies to address school needs. To address school  needs  and  build  teachers ' confidence  in  teaching  AI,  schools should prioritize the development of GenAI guidance, and policies as suggested by teachers (S2). Given that more students already have access to GenAI applications (e.g., Midjourney, ChatGPT) in their everyday lives, it is important for existing technologies (e.g., learning management  systems,  search  engines,  chatbots)  to  incorporate  GenAI  functionalities (S3). Guidance should be developed to cover age-appropriate teaching topics, such as basic AI knowledge, the societal impacts of AI, and  AI  ethics  (e.g.,  plagiarism,  bias,  and  privacy  concerns),  to  meet specific  curriculum  needs  (Bellas  et  al.,  2023).  In  addition,  schools should incorporate the use of GenAI, and introduce AI-related concepts and skills into the curriculum and in different subject domains (Bellas et al., 2023). This includes teaching students about the ethical implications of AI, data analysis, and critical thinking across various subjects.

Once  the  teaching  contents  have  been  identified,  it  is  crucial  to provide related guidelines and document successful cases for teachers to design their instructional practices in the classroom (S3). It is important to note that teaching GenAI is not limited to computer science lessons; it can involve different subject knowledge. For instance, language teachers could engage students in interacting with GenAI bots to enhance their language acquisition and writing skills. Furthermore, it is essential to ensure that the incorporation of GenAI across curriculum, pedagogy, and  technologies  aligns  with  existing  ethical,  security,  and  privacy policies. These guidelines should also clarify responsible uses of AI tools, such as human review and maintaining academic integrity. By providing clear guidance and support, schools can empower teachers to effectively integrate AI into their instructional practices while upholding ethical standards and ensuring student safety and privacy.

In addition to guidance, school leaders play a pivotal role in the AI era due to several key reasons. Firstly, they provide a clear vision for organizations in harnessing the power of AI in education. They need to identify the potential of AI to drive schools ' major concerns and direction to spur innovation in education and enhance teaching/learning and administration efficiency. They should keep pace with the digital world to identify the transformative impact of AI and articulate a vision that inspires  their  teaching  teams  toward  an  AI-ready  goal.  Moreover, leaders are responsible for addressing ethical and responsible AI practices. They establish guidelines and policies that ensure AI educational systems are deployed with transparency, fairness, and accountability for parents and students. Leaders have the responsibility to navigate the

Fig. 3. AI education policy implementation at the macro, meso and micro levels.

<!-- image -->

ethical  complexities  of  AI,  making  decisions  that  prioritize  the  wellbeing  of  students  (Crawford  et  al.,  2023).  Furthermore,  teacher leaders drive collaboration between universities, technical companies, parents, and students in the AI ecosystem. They foster collaborations between academia, industry, and government to exchange best practices, and address shared GenAI teaching and administration challenges. Through  collaboration,  leaders  can  leverage  collective  resources  to maximize the potential of AI for the benefit of students.

Facilitate organizational learning. To build teachers ' confidence in  using  AI,  schools  need  to  prioritize  organizational  learning  (i.e., teacher professional development) to equip teachers with the knowledge and  skills  needed  to  effectively  integrate  GenAI  into  their  teaching practices (S1). Schools can establish partnerships with organizations and industry  experts  in  the  field  of  AI  to  provide  access  to  resources, expertise, and opportunities for students to engage in AI-related projects and  competitions  (Pantanowitz  et  al.,  2022).  Further,  professional development opportunities should be provided to all teachers, focusing on  enhancing  their  understanding  of  instructional  approaches  that effectively integrate GenAI. By bringing together educators ' experiences with AI, schools can document successful use cases and identify areas for improvement, building collective organizational knowledge and teacher capacity  via  lesson  planning  and  teacher  sharing.  It  is  important  to recognize and address the diverse backgrounds of teachers, ensuring that professional development initiatives are inclusive and considerate of different subject perspectives and teaching contexts when integrating GenAI. This approach will foster a sense of confidence and collaboration among teachers, enabling them to develop meaningful interdisciplinary learning activities.

Promoting  teachers ' and  students ' AI  literacy. Professional development is crucial for teachers to enhance their understanding of AI technologies and competencies in the classroom (S1). Training programs should focus on practical skills, enabling educators to confidently integrate AI tools into their practices. For example, Ding et al. (2024) found that a case-based AI professional development program in seven middle schools significantly improved teachers ' AI literacy. Similarly, Fissore et al. (2024) developed a training program for 53 teachers, emphasizing AI tools and their social impacts. For students, integrating AI literacy into the STEAM learning curricula is also vital; schools should create age-appropriate AI literacy programs that cover fundamental AI concepts  and ethical considerations (Ng et al., 2023). Teachers can also engage students in exploring AI ' s societal impact, enhancing their critical  thinking  and  creativity.  Additionally,  involving  parents  through seminars can help them understand AI ' s role in education, reinforcing the importance of AI literacy at home and gaining their support in using AI for learning (Ng et al., 2021).

## 5.4. Comparative insights on global perspectives of GenAI in education

This section enriches the global discourse on GenAI in education by drawing comparisons with existing reports from different countries/regions.  By  situating  the  Canadian  experience  alongside  reports  and studies from Mainland China, the United States, and Hong Kong. These comparative  insights  underscore  the  importance  of  understanding regional differences in the perspectives of GenAI in school education.

## 5.4.1. Responses to GenAI in canadian schools

According to the Government of Canada ' s  guide (2024), the integration  of  GenAI  can  enhance  learning  outcomes  by  supporting personalized learning experiences and fostering creativity in Canadian schools. This guide suggests educators to tailor their approach in using GenAI  tools  and  assist  in  daily  tasks  such  as  drafting  documents, generating images in creating presentations, and brainstorming ideas. However, it is crucial to approach the use of these tools with caution, ensuring that risks are appropriately assessed as suggested by the ethical guidelines  and  privacy  regulations  outlined  in  the  guide.  Teachers should  engage  with  stakeholders,  including  parents  and  educational experts, to address potential risks, such as bias in AI-generated content, and to establish best practices that promote critical thinking and digital literacy among students. By combining GenAI with pedagogical strategies, schools can create a more engaging and effective learning environment while maintaining the integrity of educational objectives.

## 5.4.2. National responses to GenAI in school education

The Chinese government ' s "Interim Measures for the Management of Generative Artificial Intelligence Services," issued in July 2023, reflects a dual approach of promoting innovation while ensuring national security (Migliorini, 2024). The document employs the term ' encouragement ' to reflect a proactive stance toward nurturing a culture of school innovation, digital citizenship and lifelong learning. However, it tends to put less focus on student ' s privacy. For example, some schools would adopt  AI-enabled  cameras  and  wearable  devices  to  monitor  student behavior and attendance in real-time. In contrast, Canada recognized the importance of privacy and cybersecurity in its AI initiatives, and they could not track student engagement during lessons (Attard-Frost et al.,

2024). Furthermore, in February 2024, China ' s Ministry of Education announced a list of 184 primary and secondary schools designated as AI education bases to strengthen the development of AI education (The State  Council  The  People ' s  Republic  of  China,  2024).  This  top-down approach equips schools to develop AI-based curricula, integrate disciplines, reform teaching methods, collaboratively construct and share AI education  resources,  and  enhance  teachers ' AI  literacy.  In  contrast, Canada ' s efforts are more decentralized and use bottom-up initiatives rather  than  a  cohesive  national  strategy  for  integrating  AI  into  the curriculum.

In  the  USA,  the  report  "Artificial  Intelligence  and  the  Future  of Teaching and Learning: Insights and Recommendations" (United States Office of Educational Technology, 2023) outlines strategies for effectively leveraging these technologies within the education sector. With a highly developed ed-tech market, the USA has established guidelines and resources aimed at a broad audience, including teachers, educational leaders, policymakers, researchers, and innovators in educational technology.  Schools  have  the  flexibility  to  design  their  own  policies according to their  specific  needs.  Some  forward-thinking  schools  are adopting  advanced  GenAI  applications;  however,  the  absence  of  a top-down  approach  means  that  schools  are  not  mandated  to  follow specific policies or implement AI, creating a gap between those willing to advance and those that are not. In October 2023, across 51 states, less than half of the states (n = 23) had released some form of AI guidance. In contrast, Canada is less technologically prepared than the USA and tends to  adopt a school-based bottom-up approach rather than a top-down strategy. While there are initiatives and growing interest in AI ' s potential, Canada ' s approach is generally less developed, lacking the necessary  resources  and  strategies  to  support  widespread  adoption  across K-12 education.

## 5.4.3. Responses to GenAI in school education in Canada and Hong Kong

In light of the contributions from authors based in Canada and Hong Kong, this section discusses the similarities and differences between the two places in their perceptions of GenAI in education. Although there is currently no research evidence quantifying the percentage of students using GenAI for their learning or schoolwork, some findings indicate that both educators and students recognize the potential of GenAI to enhance learning outcomes (e.g., HKEDB, 2024). However, they also face similar ethical dilemmas: students must navigate the risks of academic dishonesty while striving to keep up with rapid technological advancements. However, Canada and Hong Kong differ in their regulatory approaches to GenAI in education. In Canada, the lack of clear guidelines leaves students, parents, and teachers to navigate a bottom-up approach to GenAI integration in education.

In contrast, Hong Kong has taken proactive steps by implementing structured frameworks and official AI curricula that promote responsible AI use in classrooms (HKEDB, 2024). Such proactive measures could mitigate concerns related to academic integrity and ensure that AI serves as  a  supportive  educational  tool  rather  than  a  shortcut  for  learning. Despite these differences, both places share concerns about the impact of GenAI on critical thinking and knowledge retention. For example, in Canada,  it  is  worried  that  GenAI  could  exacerbate  digital  divide, misinformation,  privacy  violations,  and  reduced  students ' critical thinking due to over-reliance on AI. Similarly, educators in Hong Kong voice  apprehension  about  students  becoming  overly  reliant  on  technology at the expense of foundational skills. HKEDB (2024) highlighted the importance of equipping teachers with the abilities to guide students in  using  ChatGPT  effectively.  This  includes  instructing  students  on effective  prompting  techniques  to  retrieve  accurate  information.  To ensure responsible use, schools should establish clear guidelines outlining acceptable contexts for using ChatGPT. Students proposed the use of monitoring software that prevents the misuse of ChatGPT on their electronic devices. In contrast, Hong Kong has established region-level plans  to  introduce  AI  education  systematically  across  schools.  This proactive approach contrasts with Canada ' s reliance on local and civil society initiatives to promote AI literacy. Such a divergence highlights the differences in educational frameworks and governance systems between the two regions, with Hong Kong adopting a more centralized strategy for integrating AI into the curriculum.

Overall, there is a growing divide between Canadian schools and those in other countries/regions, where many institutions from other countries/regions are beginning to implement safeguards, understand bias risks, and establish clear educational goals for AI use through topdown and diversified approaches. In contrast, Canadian schools tend to adopt a bottom-up approach, accumulating evidence to support AI adoption. This disparity contributes to a new digital divide in education across  countries/regions.  Teachers  in  Canada  are  also  noticing  that students increasingly use AI at home, often without proper guidance or oversight,  resulting  in  differences  in  support  for  students  navigating these  tools  safely,  like  other  countries/regions.  Like  other  countries/ regions, teachers in Canada are also noticing that students increasingly use AI at home, often without proper guidance or oversight, resulting in differences in support for students navigating these tools safely. This study highlights the urgent need to equip educators with comprehensive training in strategies to deal with AI safety and ethics, and practical application.  Schools  need  to  develop  robust  AI  training  programs  to enhance both teacher and student AI literacy.

## 6. Conclusion and limitations

Although some studies have started to explore the impact of GenAI on practices and policies in education through case studies (e.g., Chiu, 2023; Cooper, 2023; O ' Dea &amp; O ' Dea, 2023), much research is needed to examine how teachers adopt GenAI, how they perceive the technologies, and  what  can  encourage  their  use  via  a  whole  school  approach.  To address this  gap,  in  this  study,  Canadian  teachers  showed  a  positive perception  and  are  aware  of  opportunities  for  integrating  GenAI  in teaching, learning, and administration. However, several challenges and concerns  were  identified  that  need  to  be  addressed  for  successful implementation. Teachers ' readiness is highlighted in this study, striving for the importance of providing professional development opportunities  to  enhance  teachers ' knowledge and skills related to  GenAI. Moreover, clear school policies and guidelines were also seen as essential to ensure the responsible and ethical use of AI in educational settings.  Access  to  AI  software  and  technical  support  provided  by  their schools were identified as key factors that would facilitate teachers in integrating GenAI effectively into their classrooms. By prioritizing professional development, establishing clear guidelines, and ensuring access to AI software and technical support, schools can foster a culture that embraces AI and maximizes its benefits in educational contexts.

However,  there  are  limitations  in  this  study.  Firstly,  the  sample consisted  of  teachers  who  participated  in  a  conference,  indicating  a potential bias towards those who already had an intention to learn about AI. It would be beneficial to collect feedback from a broader range of teachers, including those who may have more reservations or negative perceptions  towards  AI  integration.  Secondly,  this  study  was  preliminary  and  did  not  involve  any  specific  interventions  to  examine teachers ' pre-  and  post-perceptions.  To  gain  a  more  comprehensive understanding  of  teachers ' perspectives  on  GenAI  integration,  future research should focus on developing and adapting questionnaires that address the unique situations and challenges related to AI in education.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Davy Tsz Kit Ng: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Writing -original draft,  Validation,  Supervision,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Eagle Kai Chi Chan: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Resources,  Investigation,  Data  curation. Chung  Kwan  Lo: Writing -review &amp; editing, Resources, Data curation.

## Statements on open data

Data available on request from the authors.

## Ethics and conflicts of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. All procedures  performed  in  studies  involving  human  participants  were  in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. The research has gain  approval  from  institutional  ethics  committee.  Informed  consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.

## Declaration of generative AI in scientific writing

During the preparation of this work the author(s) used POE in order to paraphrase elements of texts, elaborate sentences and proofread for helping me to stimulate thinking and clarify language and accuracy. After  using  this  tool/service,  the  author(s)  reviewed  and  edited  the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## Funding and acknowledgements

This work described in this paper was supported by Department of Mathematics and Information Technology (Department Research Grant; MIT/DRG02/24-25), The Education University of Hong Kong.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.caeai.2025.100373.

## References

- Aizawa, I., &amp; Rose, H. (2019). An analysis of Japan ' s English as medium of instruction initiatives within higher education: The gap between meso-level policy and microlevel practice. Higher Education, 77 (6), 1125 -1142.
- Attard-Frost, B., Brandusescu, A., &amp; Lyons, K. (2024). The governance of artificial intelligence in Canada: Findings and opportunities from a review of 84 AI governance initiatives. Government Information Quarterly, 41 (2), Article 101929.
- Bellas, F., Guerreiro-Santalla, S., Naya, M., &amp; Duro, R. J. (2023). AI curriculum for European high schools: An embedded intelligence approach. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 33 (2), 399 -426.
- Borah, A. R., Nischith, T. N., &amp; Gupta, S. (2024). Improved learning based on GenAI. , January. In 2024 2nd international conference on intelligent data communication technologies and internet of things (IDCIoT) (pp. 1527 -1532). IEEE.
- Chan, C. K. Y., &amp; Hu, W. (2023). Students ' voices on generative AI: Perceptions, benefits, and challenges in higher education. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 20 (1), 43.
- Chen, L., Chen, P., &amp; Lin, Z. (2020). Artificial intelligence in education: A review. IEEE Access, 8 , 75264 -75278.
- Chiu, T. K. (2023). The impact of generative AI (GenAI) on practices, policies and research direction in education: A case of ChatGPT and Midjourney. Interactive Learning Environments , 1 -17.
- Cooper, G. (2023). Examining science education in chatgpt: An exploratory study of generative artificial intelligence. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 32 (3), 444 -452.
- Crawford, J., Cowling, M., &amp; Allen, K. A. (2023). Leadership is needed for ethical ChatGPT: Character, assessment, and learning using artificial intelligence (AI). Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice, 20 (3), 2.
- Ding, A. C. E., Shi, L., Yang, H., &amp; Choi, I. (2024). Enhancing teacher AI literacy and integration through different types of cases in teacher professional development. Computers and Education Open, 6 , Article 100178.
- Egara, F. O., &amp; Mosimege, M. (2024). Exploring the integration of artificial intelligencebased ChatGPT into mathematics instruction: Perceptions, challenges, and implications for educators. Education Sciences, 14 (7), 742.
- Fissore, C., Floris, F., Conte, M. M., &amp; Sacchet, M. (2024). Teacher training on artificial intelligence in education. In Smart learning environments in the post pandemic era: Selected papers from the CELDA 2022 conference (pp. 227 -244). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
- Gayed, J. M., Carlon, M. K. J., Oriola, A. M., &amp; Cross, J. S. (2022). Exploring an AI-based writing Assistant ' s impact on English language learners. Computers in Education: Artificial Intelligence, 3 , Article 100055.
- Goedde, D., Noehl, S., Wolf, C., Rupert, Y., Rimkus, L., Ehlers, J.,  Sellmann, T. (2023). A SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) analysis of ChatGPT in the medical literature: Concise review. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 25 , Article e49368.
- Herbold, S., Hautli-Janisz, A., Heuer, U., Kikteva, Z., &amp; Trautsch, A. (2023). A large-scale comparison of human-written versus ChatGPT-generated essays. Scientific Reports, 13 (1), Article 18617.
- HKEDB. (2024). Module on artificial intelligence for junior secondary level. Retrieved from https://www.edb.gov.hk/en/curriculum-development/kla/technology-edu/re sources/InnovationAndTechnologyEducation/resources.html.
- Jaboob, M., Hazaimeh, M., &amp; Al-Ansi, A. M. (2024). Integration of generative AI techniques and applications in student behavior and cognitive achievement in Arab higher education. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction , 1 -14.
- Jansen, B. J., Jung, S. G., &amp; Salminen, J. (2023). Employing large language models in survey research. Natural Language Processing Journal, 4 , Article 100020.
- Knight, S., Dickson-Deane, C., Heggart, K., Kitto, K., Kozano  glu, D. C., Maher, D.,  Zarrabi, F. (2023). Generative AI in the Australian education system: An open data set of stakeholder recommendations and emerging analysis from a public inquiry. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 39 (5), 101 -124.
- Kohnke, L., Moorhouse, B. L., &amp; Zou, D. (2023). Exploring generative artificial intelligence preparedness among university language instructors: A case study. Computers in Education: Artificial Intelligence, 5 , Article 100156.
- Kong, S. C., Cheung, M. Y. W., &amp; Tsang, O. (2024). Developing an artificial intelligence literacy framework: Evaluation of a literacy course for senior secondary students using a project-based learning approach. Computers in Education: Artificial Intelligence, 6 , Article 100214.
- Laviola, F., Palese, B., Kim, S. T., &amp; Cucari, N. (2024). are Created Equal: The Case of a Soft Skills Coaching Bot in Education. In , Vol. 2024 . Academy of Management Proceedings (p. 18543). Valhalla, NY: Not all AI Chatbots. No. 1.
- Levin, G., Horesh, N., Brezinov, Y., &amp; Meyer, R. (2024). Performance of ChatGPT in medical examinations: A systematic review and a meta-analysis. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 131 (3), 378 -380.
- Lo, C. K. (2023). What is the impact of ChatGPT on education? A rapid review of the literature. Education Sciences, 13 (4), 410.
- Lo, C. K., Yu, P. L. H., Xu, S., Ng, D. T. K., &amp; Jong, M. S. Y. (2024). Exploring the application of ChatGPT in ESL/EFL education and related research issues: a systematic review of empirical studies. Smart Learning Environments, 11 (1), 50.
- Migliorini, S. (2024). China ' s Interim Measures on generative AI: Origin, content and significance. Computer Law &amp; Security Report, 53 , Article 105985.
- Mittal, U., Sai, S., &amp; Chamola, V. (2024). A comprehensive review on generative ai for education. IEEE Access .
- Moorhouse, B. L., &amp; Kohnke, L. (2024). The effects of generative AI on initial language teacher education: The perceptions of teacher educators. System, 122 , Article 103290.
- Moundridou, M., Matzakos, N., &amp; Doukakis, S. (2024). Generative AI tools as educators ' assistants: Designing and implementing inquiry-based lesson plans. Computers in Education: Artificial Intelligence, 7 , Article 100277.
- Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, S. K. W., &amp; Qiao, M. S. (2021). Conceptualizing AI literacy: An exploratory review. Comp. Edu: Artif. Intell., 2 , 100041.
- Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Su, J., Ng, R. C. W., &amp; Chu, S. K. W. (2023). Teachers ' AI digital competencies and twenty-first century skills in the post-pandemic world. Educ. Technol. Res. Dev., 71 (1), 137 -161.
- Ng, D. T. K., Tan, C. W., &amp; Leung, J. K. L. (2024). Empowering student self-regulated learning and science education through ChatGPT: A pioneering pilot study. British Journal of Educational Technology .
- O ' Dea, X. C., &amp; O ' Dea, M. (2023). Is artificial intelligence really the next big thing in learning and teaching in higher education? A conceptual paper. Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice, 20 (5).
- O ' Dea, X., Ng, D. T. K., O ' Dea, M., &amp; Shkuratskyy, V. (2024). Factors affecting university students ' generative AI literacy: Evidence and evaluation in the UK and Hong Kong contexts. Policy Futures in Education , Article 14782103241287401.
- Pantanowitz, L., Bui, M. M., Chauhan, C., ElGabry, E., Hassell, L., Li, Z.,  Becich, M. J. (2022). Rules of engagement: Promoting academic-industry partnership in the era of digital pathology and artificial intelligence. Academic Pathology, 9 (1), Article 100026.
- Roth, M. A., &amp; Price, J. K. (2016). The critical role of leadership for education transformation with successful technology implementation. ICT in education in global context: Comparative reports of innovations in K-12 education .
- Rudolph, J., Ismail, F. M. M., &amp; Popenici, S. (2024). Higher education ' s generative artificial intelligence paradox: The meaning of chatbot mania. Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice, 21 (6).
- Ryazanov, I.,  Ohman, C., &amp; Bj  orklund, J. (2025). How ChatGPT changed the media ' s narratives on AI: A semi-automated narrative analysis through frame semantics. Minds and Machines, 35 (1), 1 -24.
- Sadriu, S., Nuci, K. P., Imran, A. S., Uddin, I., &amp; Sajjad, M. (2021). An automated approach for analysing students feedback using sentiment analysis techniques. In Mediterranean conference on pattern recognition and artificial intelligence (pp. 228 -239). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
- Samala, A. D., Rawas, S., Wang, T., Reed, J. M., Kim, J., Howard, N. J., &amp; Ertz, M. (2024). Unveiling the landscape of generative artificial intelligence in education: A comprehensive taxonomy of applications, challenges, and future prospects. Education and Information Technologies , 1 -40.
- Schoon, I., &amp; Lyons-Amos, M. (2017). A socio-ecological model of agency: The role of psycho-social and socioeconomic resources in shaping education and employment transitions in England. Longitudinal and Life Course Studies, 8 (1), 35 -56.

- Shoufan, A. (2023). Exploring students ' perceptions of ChatGPT: Thematic analysis and follow-up survey. IEEE Access, 11 , 38805 -38818.
- Siemens, G., Marmolejo-Ramos, F., Gabriel, F., Medeiros, K., Marrone, R., Joksimovic, S., &amp; de Laat, M. (2022). Human and artificial cognition. Computers in Education: Artificial Intelligence, 3 , Article 100107.
- Singh, V., Bilal, D., Cox, A., Chidziwisano, G. H., &amp; Dinneen, J. D. (2023). Global AI initiatives: From theory to practice. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 60 (1), 836 -840.
- Tracy, S. J. (2024). Qualitative research methods: Collecting evidence, crafting analysis, communicating impact . John Wiley &amp; Sons.
- United States Office of Educational Technology. (2023). Artificial intelligence and the future of teaching and learning: Insights and recommendations. Retrieved from https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc2114121/.
- Vargas-Murillo, A. R., de la Asuncion, I. N. M., &amp; de Jess Guevara-Soto, F. (2023). Challenges and opportunities of AI-assisted learning: A systematic literature review on the impact of ChatGPT usage in higher education. International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research, 22 (7), 122 -135.
- Wang, Y. (2021). When artificial intelligence meets educational leaders ' data-informed decision-making: A cautionary tale. Studies In Educational Evaluation, 69 , Article 100872.
- Watkins, M. W., &amp; Pacheco, M. (2000). Interobserver agreement in behavioral research: Importance and calculation. Journal of Behavioral Education, 10 , 205 -212.
- Wu, D., Chen, M., Chen, X., &amp; Liu, X. (2024). Analyzing K-12 AI education: A large language model study of classroom instruction on learning theories, pedagogy, tools, and AI literacy. Computers in Education: Artificial Intelligence, 7 , Article 100295.
- Yan, L., Sha, L., Zhao, L., Li, Y., Martinez-Maldonado, R., Chen, G.,  Ga  sevi  c, D. (2024). Practical and ethical challenges of large language models in education: A systematic scoping review. British Journal of Educational Technology, 55 (1), 90 -112.
- Yang, W. (2022). Artificial Intelligence education for young children: Why, what, and how in curriculum design and implementation. Computers in Education: Artificial Intelligence, 3 , Article 100061.
- Yang, X., Wang, Q., &amp; Lyu, J. (2024). Assessing ChatGPT ' s educational capabilities and application potential. ECNU Review of Education, 7 (3), 699 -713.
- Yue, M., Jong, M. S. Y., &amp; Ng, D. T. K. (2024). Understanding K -12 teachers ' technological pedagogical content knowledge readiness and attitudes toward artificial intelligence education. Education and Information Technologies , 1 -32.
- Zhang, P., &amp; Tur, G. (2024). A systematic review of ChatGPT use in K-12 education. European Journal of Education, 59 (2), Article e12599.
- Zheng, C., Yuan, K., Guo, B., Hadi Mogavi, R., Peng, Z., Ma, S., &amp; Ma, X. (2024). Charting the future of AI in project-based learning: A Co-design exploration with students. In Proceedings of the CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1 -19).
- UNESCO. (2023). Guidance for generative AI in education and research. Retrieved from https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/guidance-generative-ai-education-and -research.