---
source_file: Ng_2022_Using_digital_story_writing_as_a_pedagogy_to.pdf
conversion_date: 2026-02-03T09:11:04.152728
converter: docling
quality_score: 95
---

<!-- image -->

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,GLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;WGLYPH&lt;0&gt;HGLYPH&lt;0&gt;OGLYPH&lt;0&gt;OGLYPH&lt;0&gt;LGLYPH&lt;0&gt;JGLYPH&lt;0&gt;HGLYPH&lt;0&gt;QGLYPH&lt;0&gt;FGLYPH&lt;0&gt;H

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence

journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-and-education-artificial-intelligence

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;22&gt;

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;11&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;19&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;21&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;12&gt;

<!-- image -->

## Using digital story writing as a pedagogy to develop AI literacy among primary students

Davy Tsz Kit Ng, Wanying Luo, Helen Man Yi Chan, Samuel Kai Wah Chu

Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: Artificial intelligence (AI) AI literacy Digital story writing AI education AI ethics Inquiry-based learning

## 1. Introduction

Artificial intelligence (AI) literacy is widely recognized as a new set of technological attitudes, abilities and competencies that people use AI effectively and ethically in everyday life (e.g., Burgsteiner et al., 2016; Kandlhofer et al., 2016; Long &amp; Magerko, 2020). In K-12 education, despite the popularity of AI tools such as Siri and chatbots, students do not know about the concepts and technology behind, or are aware of potential ethical issues related to AI (Ghallab, 2019). When tools for teaching AI become more age-appropriate for K-12 students, they are no longer merely end users of AI technologies. Educators have begun to employ different pedagogical approaches to foster students ' AI literacy. Therefore, a newly emerging term ' AI literacy ' has drawn the attention of researchers and educators to nurture the next generation to be digitally competent in AI skills and knowledge in order to be on a better footing for their future workplaces (Bawden, 2008).

As  AI  becomes  more  and  more  important  in  work  settings  and everyday life, researchers begin to define AI literacy based on the term 'literacy ' , which has been applied to define skill sets in varied disciplines

## A B S T R A C T

Artificial intelligence (AI) literacy is widely recognized as a new set of competencies that people use AI effectively and ethically in everyday life. In K-12 education, educators have started to employ different pedagogical strategies to foster students ' AI literacy. Using digital story writing (DSW) in the classroom is an effective inquirybased pedagogical approach to address literacy development by improving language and technological abilities across disciplines. This study recruited 82 primary students in Hong Kong to attend a three-month DSW journey to learn AI and completed a knowledge test at the end of the program. Among the students, 16 best-achieving students were further invited to participate in artefact-based interviews, and we further analysed their work to understand how they formulate AI understandings. It is found that the participating students were able to propose an authentic scenario, apply their new knowledge of AI and think up meaningful AI-driven solutions in their digital stories. Furthermore, we examined students ' DSW process in terms of inquiry-based pedagogical cycle (orientation, conceptualization, investigation, conclusion, discussion) to demonstrate how they learn AI. Overall, DSW as an inquiry could effectively foster students ' AI literacy in using and applying AI knowledge to solve real-life problems, far beyond merely knowing and understanding related concepts. We suggest that using DSW as a pedagogy has the potential to support students to scaffold students ' AI understanding, particularly for young children.

(Long &amp; Magerko, 2020; Ng et al. a, b). In the past, literacy was popularly  understood  as  an  ability  to  read  and  write  (McBride,  2015). Nowadays, it has been extended to new arenas such as media, digital, information, computer and AI (Kong et al., 2021). Students who are equipped with these skills could use related technologies and computers in very advanced ways to learn new knowledge and skills with their counterparts (Bell, 2010; Griffin &amp; Care, 2014; Larson &amp; Miller, 2011). On top of learning these essential skills and knowledge, students need to learn how to use AI technologies judiciously, and discriminate between ethical and unethical practices (Robinson, 2020; Rodríguez-García et al., 2020). Since AI has become one of the important technological skills in the twenty-first century, educators need to combine AI and literacy to equip students with essential abilities and mindsets that they will live, learn and work in our digital world through AI-driven technologies. In other words, AI literacy should be taught at the K-12 levels (Steinbauer et al., 2021).

Researchers have already started to design pedagogy for students to learn about the working principles behind. They learn how to apply AI concepts and applications to solve problems in different contexts (e.g.,

* Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: davyngtk@connect.hku.hk (D.T.K. Ng), lokyuenying@gmail.com (W. Luo), helenmyc@hku.hk (H.M.Y. Chan), samchu@hku.hk (S.K.W. Chu).

*

<!-- image -->

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;20&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;19&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;19&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;19&gt;

Ng &amp; Chu, 2021a; Rodríguez-García et al., 2020). For example, Rodríguez-García et  al.  (2020)  evaluated  LearningML,  a  machine  learning model builder, to encourage students to understand AI applications and how  it  can  affect  our  lives,  as  well  as  knowing  the  ethical  issues regarding  AI  technologies.  Ng  and  Chu  (2021)  designed  an  informal learning experience for students to stylise and create an AI-driven stylised picture, and explore AI via gamification and online collaboration in a social networking site.

A considerable amount of research studies have identified digital story writing (DSW) is an effective inquiry-based pedagogical approach to enhance 21st century digital skills including information, media and technological  literacy  across  disciplines  such  as  STEAM  education, computer science, and health studies (Frazel, 2010; Gubrium, 2009; Hill &amp; Grinnell, 2014; Wu et al., 2020). As discussed, AI literacy is considered as one of the digital skills that people need to learn. We proposed that digital story creation could have a great potential to combine its pedagogy (e.g., inquiry-based learning) and related digital skills (e.g., information seeking, digital drawing, using AI-driven tools). This could enhance  children ' s  ability  to  acquire  and  apply  AI  knowledge,  and create their stories to restructure their knowledge and demonstrate their understanding about AI (Julie et al., 2020; Wong et al., 2020). Through reading and  writing stories, students can scaffold their AI  understandings, and apply what they have learnt to construct stories and share views with their peers to co-construct knowledge when appreciating  and  critiquing  other  students ' work.  During  the  DSW  process, students  could  use  AI-driven  tools  such  as  proofreading  software, translation tools and recommendation systems to facilitate their story creation. Therefore, this is meaningful to discuss the possibility of using DSW as a pedagogy to teach/learn AI literacy.

This article reports a case study investigating the instructional design of  DSW  in  fostering  AI  literacy  in  a  3-month  digital  story  writing learning program ' AI, Robots, Love and Peace ' among 82 primary students in Hong Kong. In the following sessions, we first provide a literature review of related studies on AI literacy and examine the potential of using digital story writing as a pedagogy to develop students ' AI literacy. After proposing the research questions, the research methods and lesson design were described. The results are reported afterward, and the discussions of the major findings and implications for lesson design are presented. Conclusions and limitations of the study are outlined at the end of the article.

## 2. Theoretical framework

## 2.1. AI literacy

Artificial intelligence (AI) literacy is similar to classic literacy such as digital literacy and that it should emerge as a new literacy skill set that in response to this new era of intelligence. Although the definitions are varied, the common idea is that AI literacy is a new set of technological attitudes, abilities and competencies that people use AI effectively and ethically in everyday life. The term ' AI literacy ' was first proposed by Burgsteiner et al. (2016) and Kandlhofer et al. (2016) that it is an ability to understand the basic knowledge and concepts behind these AI-driven technologies. In addition to knowing and using AI ethically, AI literacy serves  as  a  set  of  competencies  that  enable  individuals  to  critically evaluate AI technologies, communicate and collaborate effectively with AI (Long &amp; Magerko, 2020). Further, Ng et al. (2021a, b) added AI to every learners ' twenty-first century technological literacy in work settings and everyday life, and proposed AI to become a fundamental skill for everyone, not just for computer scientists. Inspired by Bloom Taxonomy, AI literacy is conceptualized as the cognitive levels across the spectra of AI learning inquiry with four perspectives, namely, know and understand, use and apply, create and evaluate, as well as ethical issues (Ng et al., 2021a, b).

Thirty  years  ago,  computer  applications  gained  popularity  across industries. This drives the need for users to become digitally competent in using computer systems related to their specific task or job. As such, the  term  'digital  literacy ' emerged  to  assess  basic  computer-related concepts  and  skills.  The  importance  of  digital  literacy  increases  as more people depend on the use of computer technologies to develop new social and economic opportunities (Leahy &amp; Dolan, 2010). Similarly, in succession to digital advancement, AI technologies started to arise and imitate human intelligence in machines for computers to learn, reason and perceive. AI started to gain its importance in scientific and engineering research, and academic environments, and had become ubiquitous in our daily lives in the 2010s. Based on Bloom Taxonomy, Ng et al. (2021a, b) framed a theoretical model to conceptualise how AI literacy is described in following four cognitive standards.

Know and understand AI. The first most fundamental definition of AI literacy has focused on basic AI concepts, skills, knowledge and attitudes that require no prior knowledge. Instead of merely being the end users of AI applications, students should understand its technologies and working principles, especially when AI learning tools (e.g., teachable machines,  robotics)  become  more  age-appropriate  for  students  to implement  their  machine  learning  models.  In  K-12  education,  researchers  designed  learning  curriculums  and  hands-on  activities  that foster AI literacy that focuses on how students gain AI concepts (e.g., Druga et al., 2019; Ng &amp; Chu, 2021a). For example, children could learn AI via playing, looking and feeling with smart toys and AI agents. Robotics is also a common tool to facilitate children to recognise different objects and people. When they saw and realized that the robot could pick up a cube it had just recognized, they became amazed (Druga et al., 2019). Moreover, some recent AI-driven technologies such as simulation (e.g., Teachable Machine) and drawing tools (e.g., image stylizer) could bring children engaging and interactive experiences to explore AI (Ng &amp; Chu, 2021a).

Use and apply AI. After knowing the AI concepts, applying AI concepts and applications in different contexts is the second cognitive level that students could reach (e.g., Druga et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2021). When using AI, human-centered considerations and focusing on using AI concepts and application ethically would also be important issues for the societal good. On top of using AI ethically, some researchers borrowed the  ideas  of  computational  thinking  to  interplay  AI  literacy  and  AI thinking (see Table 3). AI thinking refers to the construction of logic and algorithms in order to support students ' understanding of how to use knowledge bases for problem-solving, processing semantics and handling unstructured data (Vazhayil et al., 2019). For example, How and  Hung  (2019)  leveraged  AI  thinking  through  conducting  data

Table 1 Characteristics of the participants.

| No.                                  | Name (fictitious)                    | Gender                               | Level of study                       | Story name                                     |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Junior form students (Primary 1 - 3) | Junior form students (Primary 1 - 3) | Junior form students (Primary 1 - 3) | Junior form students (Primary 1 - 3) |                                                |
| J1                                   | Hung                                 | Female                               | Primary 1                            | The Adventure of Princess Wawa in Kanga Land   |
| J2                                   | Yi                                   | Female                               | Primary 3                            | Romy and Me                                    |
| J3                                   | Max                                  | Female                               | Primary 3                            | Kelvin, the New Security Guard                 |
| J4                                   | Tse                                  | Female                               | Primary 1                            | The Day after 2099                             |
| J5                                   | Kong                                 | Female                               | Primary 2                            | The Robot and the Kungfu Girl                  |
| J6                                   | Elva                                 | Female                               | Primary 3                            | The Robot Princess                             |
| Senior form students (Primary 4 - 6) | Senior form students (Primary 4 - 6) | Senior form students (Primary 4 - 6) | Senior form students (Primary 4 - 6) |                                                |
| S1                                   | Leung                                | Female                               | Primary 4                            | Love and Peace - Lily Saves the Animals        |
| S2                                   | Hai                                  | Female                               | Primary 6                            | The Restaurant                                 |
| S3                                   | Trinity                              | Female                               | Primary 6                            | A Trip to the Future: AI Takes Over the World? |
| S4                                   | Hin                                  | Male                                 | Primary 5                            | The Future of the Earth                        |
| S5                                   | Ho                                   | Female                               | Primary 4                            | Blubber - The Sea Robot                        |
| S6                                   | Chung                                | Male                                 | Primary 5                            | Smartbot ' s Amazing Adventures                |
| S7                                   | Pak                                  | Male                                 | Primary 5                            | The Peaceful Confrontation                     |
| S8                                   | Sammy                                | Female                               | Primary 5                            | Health Alliance                                |
| S9                                   | Athena                               | Female                               | Primary 5                            | You in the Sea, I Only Have Feelings for You   |
| S10                                  | Mok                                  | Female                               | Primary 4                            | The Queen ' s New Face Mask                    |

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

Table 2 Coding framework of AI literacy

.

| AI literacy             | Definitions                                                                                    | Sample sentence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Sample artefact                         |
|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| 1.Know & understand AI  | Know the basic functions of AI and how to use AI applications.                                 | Smartbot is the robot that Hayden invented. He is an artificially intelligent robot. He has the reactive functionality of sensing, scanning capacity in order to identify people ' s emotions, actions and different sounds. The best thing is that he can transform into any machine. | Smartbot ' s Amazing Adventures         |
| 2.Use AI                | Applying AI knowledge, concepts and applications in different scenarios.                       | ' What should I do? ' Lily wondered. Lily called Siri and Siri said , ' Use some bandages. Stop the bleeding! '                                                                                                                                                                        | Love and peace - Lily saves the animals |
| 3.AI ethics             | Human-centered considerations (e.g., fairness, accountability, transparency, ethics, safety).  | AI found the ' true wisdom ' in this world. Nothing is more important than love and peace (be fair, inclusive and harmless). Highest wisdom is not conquering but to love one another.                                                                                                 | The Day After 2099                      |
| 4. Evaluate & create AI | Higher-order thinking skills (e.g., evaluate, appraise, predict, design) with AI applications. | At school, I also construct robots with sensors … and I have learnt how to use AI arts to combine the painting styles and create a new work .                                                                                                                                          | Kelvin, The New Security Guard          |

Table 3 Interplay between AI and Brennan and Resnick ' s (2012) computational thinking.

| Elements                 | Descriptions                                                                                                          | Examples                                                                                               |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AI concepts AI practices | Technical and conceptual understanding of the basic AI concepts. The techniques and strategies used when applying AI. | Classification, prediction and generation. Training, validation and testing. Remixing or reusing code. |
| AI perspectives          | Attitudes and dispositions adopted while solving problems.                                                            | Collaborating to solve problems, understanding of technology as a problem-solving tool.                |

analytics  with  computing,  and  interpreted  new  findings  from  the machine-learned discovery of hidden patterns in data. All these abilities indicated that students could apply their AI concepts to express solutions in different contexts.

Evaluate and create AI. AI augments human intelligence with digital automation and alludes to AI literacy to engage learners in higher-order thinking activities. Other than knowing and using AI with concepts and practices, studies had extended AI literacy to other competencies that enabled students to critically evaluate  AI technologies,  communicate and collaborate effectively with AI, and create AI-driven artefacts (e.g., Long &amp; Magerko, 2020). For example, Han et al. (2018) enhanced students ' scientific and technological knowledge which then was applied in scientific research-based learning to solve practical problems. Long et al. (2019) engaged citizens in co-creating and experiencing AI-driven installations in public areas and museums to develop their AI literacy and experiences.

AI  ethics. As  AI  plays  an  important  role  in  day-to-day  decision making, misused or poorly designed AI could cause irreparable harm to humans and the society (Jobin et al., 2019). AI-concerned scientists and engineers like Elon Musk expound on the horrors that future AI technologies may wreak on humanity in decades to come (Johnson, 2019). Gong et al. (2020) found that students pay little attention to ethical concerns such as bias in AI and legal responsibility (8%), and intellectual property (9%). It could be hazardous to use and design AI technologies without safety and ethics guidelines. As such, it has been increasingly important in recent years to include human-centered and ethical considerations  to  educate  students  to  become  socially  responsible  when using and designing these applications (Ahmad et al., 2020). Previous research that incorporated ethical considerations such as algorithmic bias  and  ethical  design  of  recommender  systems  into  AI  and  Ethics curricula found that students were able to engage with these concepts (Lee  et  al.,  2021).  Therefore,  educators  should  not  only  focus  on developing students ' AI abilities and interests, but also help students to realize the societal impact and ethical concerns.

## 2.2. Using DSW for AI literacy development

Catalyzed  by  the  worldwide  STEM  and  maker  movement,  researchers raised a new focus on the impact of making to provide new opportunities for  learners to  engage  in  constructionist  practices  with digital  technologies  (Hughes  et  al.,  2017;  Laurillard  et  al.,  2013). Constructionist practices stress the importance of digital tools, media, and learning context (AI) and encourage learners to build new knowledge and understand the world around them through making sense of their  experience  and  constructing  meaningful  artefacts  (Ackermann, 2001; Papert, 1980). Many of them emphasize the hands-on making through using technologically enhanced artefacts such as simulators, mobile apps and robotics (e.g., Ng et al., 2021; Ng &amp; Chu, 2021b) but many tied digital story writing (DSW) to constructionist theory (e.g., Green, 2013; Hafner &amp; Miller, 2011).

DSW is a combination of pedagogy and technology to foster student ' s ability and acquire different subject knowledge. It facilitates students to learn new cognitive concepts and combine different semiotic systems (Smyrnaiou et al., 2017), and combine narrated audio texts, images, videos and other multimedia elements to create media artefacts (Boase, 2008). It is a powerful cognitive development tool to combine language, visual, and digital representation could enrich how students used images,  sound,  and  movie  editing  techniques  to  express  causality  and development from one scene to another. During DSW experience, students  have  the  learning  opportunity  to  apply  their  prior  knowledge, research, reflect from their daily life experience (Boase, 2008), explain and construct a finalised story.

In the context of AI learning, DSW has changed the learning opportunities for AI literacy development. First, it broadens opportunities for students  to  use  academic  language  proficiency  such  as  reading  and writing to explore new knowledge (Barber, 2016; Uccelli et al., 2015). It renders to learn abstract AI concepts and ideas accessible to younger children. In constructing a story, students firstly have to observe, know and  understand  AI  knowledge.  Then,  they  organize,  classify,  and analyze  the  main  elements  of  scientific  notions  to  synthesize  their cognitive frames. Wong et al. (2020) suggested that storytelling could encourage students to explore how to interact with sensors, discuss why AI has an impact on everyday living, recognise different AI applications and why AI ethics such as safety may be an issue in our society. Students could gather information and read to construct knowledge and connect with their everyday experiences such as using sensors and societal impacts about AI (Yuksel et al., 2011).

Second, DSW provides a strong foundation in multimodal literacies by shifting verbal to multimedia modes in which students apply their prior  knowledge  and  express  it  in  media  formats  (e.g.,  Eisenlauer &amp; Karatza,  2020;  Yang,  2012).  DSW  as  a  pedagogy  combines  different semiotic resources, such as speech, text, gestures, graphics, music and video presentations for students to ' talk about the topic, to communicate about it, to tell and write a story about it ' (Dougherty, 2012, p. 13).

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

Table 4

| Five phases in inquiry-based Phases   | learning. Inquiry-based learning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Using AI-driven chatbot as an example                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Orientation                           | /uni25CF Students get ideas about the topic to be investigated and introduce the problems to be solved. /uni25CF They then do observations and research that guide them to explore a specific phenomenon.                                                                                                                                                                                      | /uni25CF Generate a writing topic about AI-driven chatbot design. /uni25CF Introduce problems to be solved in the story (e.g., how chatbots for restaurants can facilitate waiters ' work). /uni25CF Make observations from everyday life and research from the Internet and books (e.g., chatbots can help waiters                           |
| Conceptualization                     | /uni25CF Questioning: Students generate questions, search for information on the web and analyze it. /uni25CF Hypothesis generation: They then make hypotheses and brainstorm solutions and                                                                                                                                                                                                    | /uni25CF Ask questions (e.g., what are chatbots used for in daily life?). /uni25CF Generate hypotheses and brainstorm solutions for their stories (e.g., generate a working flow and characteristics of a chatbot in the story).                                                                                                              |
| Investigation                         | ideas for their project. /uni25CF Exploration: Students carry out their plans or experimental design, investigate, observe, collect evidence to address the proposed questions. /uni25CF Data interpretation: They can also analyze and represent evidence, evaluate, generate synthesis, identify patterns, make inferences and make sense of online information. /uni25CF Students construct | /uni25CF Carry out writing plans and explore the issue (e. g., how the robots ' characteristics match the story lines and scenes to solve the proposed problem). /uni25CF Analyze the existing chatbot designs that are used in restaurants, and write the stories that make sense according to students ' information findings and evidence. |
| Conclusion                            | reasonings with models, solve problems, draw conclusions and offer solutions via reports, and make judgements based on the inferences.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | /uni25CF Create and construct their stories to offer solutions to solve the problems suggested in the story (e. g., the chatbot becomes the waiter ' s companion to help him survive a                                                                                                                                                        |
| Discussion                            | /uni25CF Communication: Students discuss and share their inquiry, justify explanations, generate arguments and new understandings. /uni25CF Reflection: They can also reflect on themselves and evaluate their performance.                                                                                                                                                                    | crisis in his restaurant). /uni25CF Discuss and share their inquiry about the story. Justify explanations and misconceptions and generate new understandings based on the story. /uni25CF Reflect on themselves and evaluate their performance (e.g., are there any ethical or privacy concerns to use                                        |

Students could use digital story creation tools such as web-based creation  platforms,  blogs  and  wikis  to  develop  significant  information technology skills, information literacy and language abilities (e.g., Woo et al., 2013). Students could apply what they have learnt and reinterpret AI concepts through digital story creation using these semiotic resources and tools. They write texts that are enriched with related pictures or sound in accordance with the AI context and meaning. This procedure is improved when students are influenced by their parental and teachers ' support, students ' collaboration and social interaction. As such, their stories could transfer their beliefs, values, and own perception of the AI

and everyday world.

Today ' s society demands multidisciplinary and digital skills which could  strengthen  students ' capabilities  to  apply  their  knowledge  for personal and social empowerment for communication and creation via media and information channels. As discussed in the above section, DSW as  a  pedagogy  could  combine  content  knowledge  (AI  context)  and multimodal  technology  (text,  audio,  image,  gestures,  videos)  which scaffold students ' AI understanding and encourage them to explore this new field of knowledge and create their own stories using digital skills via video making and graphics drawing. Therefore, this article proposes to  use  21st  century  digital  literacy  as  the  basis  for  its  sound  implementation in the context of AI literacy. The identified digital skills are technical, information, communication, collaboration, creativity, critical thinking and problem-solving (Van Laar et al., 2017). Using DSW could demonstrate its potential to be one of the important information, media and technology skills in 21st century learning (Long &amp; Magerko, 2020; Wong et al., 2020). Throughout the DSW creation process, students need to obtain the AI-related skills that they need to live, learn, and work in a society to facilitate them to communicate and access new information through AI and digital technologies.

## 2.3. Inquiry-based learning and DSW

Prior research has shown the role of inquiry in reading and writing as a way to acquire new knowledge and a method of restructuring their knowledge (Chu, Reynolds, Tavares, Notari, &amp; Lee, 2021; McGinley &amp; Tierney, 1988). For example, Kaeophanuek, Na-Songkhla, and Nilsook (2019) categorised  the  critical  inquiry  learning  process  to  propose  a model to enhance students ' digital literacy such as information skills, socio-emotional skills and cognitive skills through DSW based on 12 students ' work. Five critical inquiry methods were identified. First, this pedagogy could stimulate students ' thinking, and encourage them to raise  critical  questions  to  undertake  research  and  obtain  knowledge. Second, students can explore information from multiple learning sources and illustrate problems for a variety of solutions from learners ' experiences and learning processes. After gathering information, students need to further analyze the resources they found and expand their knowledge through discussion and collaboration with others. This could deepen their understanding and expand the scope of their knowledge. Finally, students could reflect on themselves and sharpen their learning process.

Other  studies  also  suggested  the  roles  of  reading  and  writing  to scaffold students ' understanding in a particular discipline via inquirybased learning. For example, Harrison and Parks (2017) identified a collaboration between STEM learning and inquiry-based writing to help students create meaningful STEM learning experiences via stimulating intersection of cognition  and  creativity, sharpening  their  critical thinking and problem-solving skills. Another study conducted by Ashbrook (2013) believed that reading could extend student STEM learning about making observations, investigating engineering design problems and demonstrating with digital artefacts. Although these studies have mentioned a list of abilities that students could gain through inquiry-based reading and writing, few generalised the most common core phases of inquiry-based learning via reading and writing to reflect the different implementations.

A review was conducted by Pedaste et al. (2015) in response to this research gap and developed a five-phase inquiry-based learning model based on learners ' perspectives in 32 studies. This model summarises the core features of the inquiry-based learning process that combines the strengths of the existing studies. The review categorised a list of 109 learning  behaviours  (e.g.,  observation,  finding  a  topic,  searching  for information,  synthesizing)  to  formulate  the  five  phases  including orientation, conceptualization, investigation, conclusion and discussion. Among these studies, two studies focused on students ' development of computer and technological literacy in the context of science learning. Zhang  and  Quintana  (2012)  applied  an  online  inquiry  approach  to facilitate students to generate scientific questions, search for

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

information on the web, evaluate and make sense of online information, and integrate different pieces of information to formulate solutions to solve  problems.  Furthermore,  Wecker  et  al.  (2007)  designed  an inquiry-based  environment  for  37  students  in  a  secondary  school working in pairs on the project 'How far does light go? ' to enhance their technological literacy  skills  (procedural  computer-related  knowledge, self-confidence in using the computer, and familiarity with computers). Since AI has become one of the important technological skills in the twenty-first  century, we can see the potential of using this model to examine students ' development of AI literacy via the DSW processes. Table 4 describes how inquiry-based learning is applied in digital story reading  and  writing  processes  using  AI-driven  chatbot  design  as  an example.

## 2.4. Research gap

As  AI  becomes  more  and  more  important,  researchers  began  to define AI literacy based on the term 'literacy ' which has been applied to define skill sets in varied disciplines (Long &amp; Magerko, 2020). However, few  studies  have  provided  comprehensive  explanations  on  how  to conceptualise AI literacy. Second, although educators have rich experience in incorporating DSW in encouraging students across disciplines, definitive evidence that using DSW in fostering students ' AI literacy in K-12 education has yet to  be established.  It  has  yet  to  be  examined whether DSW could effectively foster students ' AI abilities and interests, and how students perceive such digital story writing experience. With the great potential of using DSW, this study aims to address these gaps, by  analysing  student ' s  interviews  and  digital  artefacts  (i.e.,  digital stories) that ultimately provide more evidence to conceptualise the term 'AI literacy ' .

Therefore, the focus of this article is to address how DSW fosters AI literacy; to this end, we will address the following research questions:

Q1. How does digital story writing foster upper primary students ' AI literacy?

Q2. What inquiry-based learning processes did students demonstrate through digital story creation to learn AI?

## 3. Methodology

A  mixed  research  method  was  used  to  collect  self-reported  data through semi-structured interviews and survey responses which aimed at triangulating data from both students and parents (Creswell et al., 2011, pp. 541 -545). We recruited over 82 primary school students in Hong  Kong  to  participate  in  7-day  workshops  to  learn  digital  story creations  and  AI  knowledge  in  three  months.  The  learning  program entailed  teaching  the  student  participants  to  create  stories  in  Storyjumper  (a  platform  that  encourages  students  to  create,  narrate,  and publish  their  digital  stories  online).  While  quantitative  data  was collected using post-test and the qualitative data was collected using interviews and students ' writing artefacts. To evaluate the acquisition of AI knowledge from their DSW experience, all the students were given a post-test within one week after the intervention. Teachers were invited as judges to assess and comment on students ' work according to the rubrics, and eventually 16 best authors and their parents were further invited to participate in follow-up artefact-based interviews to evaluate their learning processes throughout the DSW experience. The reason for the  16  students  with  the  best  performance  in  the  competition  to  be selected is that we would like to investigate the positive implementation that DSW as a pedagogy could bring to students in AI literacy education. Future studies could explore the challenges that lower-achieving students met throughout the DSW learning. Table 1 demonstrates the demographic information of the interviewees.

## 3.1. Lesson design

Over the three months, students were asked to create a digital story under  the  theme  of  AI  in  a  DSW  competition.  The  first  two  months covered seven workshops for students to learn how to create digital stories  including  writing  skills  and  technological  skills,  as  well  as equipping  students  with  basic  knowledge  of  AI.  In  the  third  month, students started to create their stories and were encouraged to use any database or search engine to search for extra AI knowledge to enrich their understanding, thus polishing their stories. The major focus of the intervention is  to  adopt  the  DSW  approach  to  learn  AI.  As  such,  we focused  on  describing  AI-related  learning  tasks  instead  of  language learning  tasks.  The  learning  design  and  activities  are  described  in Table 5.

In  the  first  month,  four  lessons  were  conducted  and  the  writing theme ' AI, Robots, Love and Peace ' and rubrics for assessing students ' work were introduced at the beginning. Throughout the workshop, we equipped students with reading and writing skills to use AI as a learning context,  as  well  as  AI  knowledge  provided  students  with  several  AIrelated learning tasks. First, AI ocean activity in code.org engages students  in  knowing  machine  learning,  training  data,  and  bias,  while exploring  ethical  issues  and  how  AI  can  be  used  to  address  world problems. Second, students learn how to use an AI-driven stylizer which combines the image contents (e.g., object structure, specific layout) and image style (e.g., colour, texture, patterns in strokes, style of painting technique). They can generate fascinating painting work that is difficult to produce manually. The output matches the content data and style data of the selected images and these data are extracted from images using  a  convolutional  neural  network.  For  example,  students  could generate an image that has the content image of Mona Lisa but it was painted  by  Van  Gogh ' s  style  of  his  artwork  'starry  night ' .  Third, Quickdraw  is  an  online  game  developed  by  Google  that  challenges players to draw pictures of an object and then uses a neural network to guess  what  the  drawings  represent.  The  game  builds  its  machine learning model to learn from each drawing so as to enhance its ability to guess correctly in the future. Students could learn the working principles behind the game. After the three tasks, students completed a gamified Kahoot!  game  to  sum  up  the  AI-related  terms  that  they  have  learnt throughout the activities.

In the second month, we discussed the uses of AI-driven robots and

Table 5 Lesson design.

|   Months | Lessons          | Learning activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|----------|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|        1 | 1 - 4            | /uni25CF Learn how to read and write a creative story to promote the theme ' AI, Robots, Love & Peace ' in a competition. /uni25CF How to create a digital story? What is AI? How to write a story about this? /uni25CF Complete AI-related learning tasks (Code.org, Quickdraw and image stylzer) to understand the working principles of machine learnding. /uni25CF Complete a gamified Kahoot! game to learn the terms of neural network, data bias, Python                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|        2 | 5 - 7            | language, chatbots, machine learning, etc. /uni25CF Discuss the uses of AI-driven automated robots: What are their present and future roles in our so- ciety? How to write fiction or non-fiction about it? /uni25CF Learn to make inquiry and how to critique students ' work. /uni25CF Discuss the parents ' role in their children ' s story creation. /uni25CF Use AI-driven translations to translate students ' stories from their native language into English. /uni25CF Generate drawings inspired by some constitute famous artworks. Students are asked to attempt to convert their drawing into the art inspiration ' s style. Students witness examples of AI doing a style transfer. |
|        3 | Presentation day | /uni25CF Students make their story in the third month. They are invited to present their story and appreciate others ' work. Teachers will access and comment on students ' digital stories.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

their future roles in our society. Second, to create a digital story, students learnt how to use AI-driven translation software to translate their stories  from  their  native  language  into  English,  and  AI-driven  image stylizers to create some illustrations in their digital story books. These tasks are important for students to learn the AI applications through designing multimedia elements in their digital stories. At the end of the third  month,  all  participating  students  were  invited  to  present  their stories and the teachers will assess them according to the rubrics. Students could appreciate and critique each other ' s work.

## 3.2. Student and parent interviews

The students ' interviews aimed to explore their learning perceptions when participating in the digital story creation and AI learning activities, and examine how it could foster students ' AI literacy development. This study recruited 82 primary students in Hong Kong to attend a threemonth DSW journey to learn AI and completed a knowledge test at the end of the program. Among the students, 16 best-achieving students were further invited to participate in artefact-based interviews, and we further analysed their work to understand how they formulate AI understandings.  All  of  the  16  students  had  actively  participated  in  all learning activities. Among the 16 best-achieving students, 13 of them are  female,  which  indicates  that  DSW  learning  stimulates  female learners to perform better than boys to learn AI.

During the interview, we first validated students ' work to make sure that  their  digital  stories  are  solely  created  by  the  students,  without having  someone  substitute  them  to  write  their  books.  For  example, students were asked how their thinking, beliefs and conceptions about the topic that has been built. Then, we examined how students design their  stories  using  AI  concepts  with  learning  artefacts  (e.g.,  digital stories,  schools ' AI-related  work  and  projects,  classwork)  and  which cognition levels of AI understanding they achieved. The question protocol for parents and students is described as Appendix 1. After that, we transcribed and coded their conversations and recorded students ' artefacts for further analysis. A consent form was sent to the parents and their  students  before  conducting  the  interview.  Each  interview  was administered for about 30 -45 min in the relevant language.

## 4. Results and discussion

## 4.1. Q1. How does digital story writing foster upper primary students ' AI literacy?

Students found the DSW experience to be positive and beneficial. A post-test was administered to assess students ' basic understanding of AI knowledge using a 5-point Likert scale. Over 53% of the participants (N = 82) received an above-average performance (M = 3.18; SD = 0.95). After  that,  interviews  were  conducted  to  collect  students ' learning experience on AI and digital story writing process via Zoom or phone. Students ' digital  stories  and  STEM-related  artefacts  throughout  the learning processes were collected to examine how students foster their AI literacy throughout the DSW process. The same interview protocol was used in interviews and would facilitate researchers to categorise students ' work and feedback in the four main aspects of AI literacy (see Table 2). Their recordings were then transcribed and coded. Inductive thematic analysis was then used and grouped patterns of shared meanings  into  four  themes:  know  and  understand  AI,  use  and  apply  AI, evaluate and create AI, and AI ethics.

Know &amp; understand  AI concerns  how  students  know  the  fundamental  AI  concepts  and  how  to  use  AI  applications  in  everyday  life ethically. In this stage, students need to build awareness through playful and hands-on experience to explore AI topics. They experiment with the theory behind certain AI topics using digital technologies including webbased machine learning simulation and tools (e.g., Quickdraw, Teachable Machine), and hands-on making experience (e.g., robotics making, game design). From the interview, all of the 16 participants claimed they have demonstrated the meanings of AI functions and use AI-driven applications (e.g., translation, Siri) in their DSW journey. They gave examples of how these AI-driven applications imitate humans (e.g. talking, walking,  object/voice  recognition,  sports  and  paintings).  Follow-up questions were asked to ask students to further explain the meanings of AI.

For example, A student named Leung created a digital story called Love and peace -Lily saves the animals. In her story, Lily, a girl who loves hunting games, saves the animals in the games with the help of an AIdriven  robot  with  Siri  functions.  The  robot  can  communicate  with people and offer useful tips about how to take care of injured animals, and  recognise  weapons  and  destroy  them.  Leung  stated, ' Before  the workshops, I didn ' t know what AI was. Now I know that AI is about automation, object/voice recognition using data. Through digital story creation, my AI concept can be deepened. Although I could not fully understand all AI concepts during the workshops, I got some ideas ( e.g. , robots, automation and object recognition). ' Her mum agreed that Leung had benefited from the DSW in terms of AI learning and story creation. ' Based on my observation, she makes up her own story and she believes that AI robots can identify injured animals and save them … In the workshop, she learnt how AI recognizes objects, and then she put this concept in her story. ' Moreover, more advanced AI can learn to recognise objects and help us solve problems such as the presentation design. ' AI learns from data, upgrades its algorithms and makes models more accurate! '

Use and apply AI concerns how students apply AI knowledge, concepts and applications in different scenarios. After experimenting and familiarizing with the theory behind certain AI topics, students were encouraged to apply the AI knowledge that students have learnt and work independently on solving specific problems. This comprises theoretical and hands-on elements based on collaborative project-based and problem-solving  approaches.  When  constructing  digital  stories,  we observed that all students could explain how their main characters in their stories apply AI abilities to solve specific problems. For example, Sammy found that elderly people had many inconveniences in daily life so she designed AI-driven robots with sound recognition to facilitate the elderly to do housework. The robots also helped the eldely to recognise the  expired  food  at  home  by  checking  the  expiry  day  automatically. Although students may not need to make a real robot and solve specific problems, students could learn how to incorporate theories behind and verbally explain how their AI robots work to deal with these scenarios.

A student Hai shared her story about an AI-driven waiter to show how students apply AI in her robot chef: ' The robots can recommend some tasty  and  healthy  recipes  according  to  people ' s  willingness.  It  suggests  to people which food he/she could choose in a restaurant. It can also help people cook and save human power. ' Another student Ho created a robot that can use computer vision and machine learning to design an intelligent robot that  can  analyze  and  sort  items  for  recycling: ' AI  can  get  trained  to recognise and separate recyclables. Then, the non-recyclable items would be collected to the burning furnace. ' Another student Max developed an AIdriven  security  guard  that  has  a  list  of  advantages  compared  with  a human safeguard. For example, the security robot is not going to be sick, need  vacation  time,  and  work  consistently  on  what  they  are  programmed to do, report back accurately on what they see and react to an emergency quickly. ' Kelvin (the AI-driven security guard) has functions such  as  facial  recognition  and  it  can  know  who  are  the  residents  of  the building. It knows how to recognise and put out fires according to temperature/colour  in  an  emergency.  It  can  help  firefighters  to  ensure  residents ' safety! ' These conversations could demonstrate how students incorporate AI concepts into their stories.

In addition to using and applying AI concepts in different scenarios, students  learn  how  to  use  AI-driven  tools  to  conduct  specific  tasks. During the workshop, instructors  introduced students  to  different  AI tools to generate stunning visuals, profound poetry and transcendent music. Students could use AI tools to create artwork, compositions and music  pieces  that  are  aesthetically  pleasing  without  mastering  the painting, writing and composing techniques. In our workshop, creative

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

machine learning techniques and AI-driven tools were demonstrated to encourage students to create artwork. The nature of art and the role of human  creativity  in  the  future  start  to  become  reachable.  Students explore  tools  and  techniques  such  as  neural  networks  across  various forms of media such as text, images and music to enhance students ' creative and imaginative capabilities which facilitate students to enrich the multimedia elements in their digital story books. For example, students chose a photo or artwork (Houses), and chose a painting style (Van Gogh style) to design a new artwork (houses in Van Gogh style) (see Fig. 1). Students can also change some settings of the finalised work such as gradients, brush and colour adjustment. After discussing the ' drawing ' techniques, it is important to highlight ethical issues about generative  AI  including  the  ownership  of  artwork  and  generation  of  fake media throughout the workshop. In other words, we encourage students to use and apply AI tools ethically.

Evaluate &amp; create AI is defined as the higher-order thinking skills (e. g., evaluate, appraise, predict, design) with AI applications. Although people may argue that using AI tools to express ideas and solve problems should reach the cognitive levels of evaluating and creating artefacts (e. g., artwork, music pieces), we classify this as the ' use and apply AI ' level. This is because this type of work creation may not require students to adopt their AI knowledge and create new AI-driven artefacts. As such, using AI tools to create a work does not necessarily mean that students could create AI-driven artefacts.

While  AI  has  proved  superior  at  complex  calculations  and  predictions, creativity seems to be the domain which machines can ' t take over. To reach the level of evaluating and creating AI, students need to achieve the former two levels (i.e., know and understand, use and apply AI). They could transform their AI knowledge and apply related technologies into different scenarios and design solutions to solve specific problems.  In  this  problem-solving  process,  students  would  need  to evaluate, compare and consider different strategies and algorithms to implement their ideas. At the end, we interviewed how DSW experience facilitates students to create their AI artefacts in their STEM learning. It is found that although all students could successfully create their AIdriven main  characters  in  different scenarios  to  solve  problems designed in their fictional stories, it is difficult for researchers to see how students could explain different strategies and algorithms to implement their robots in their stories.

Out of 16 students, there are only two students who could successfully demonstrate how they design their algorithm in their school projects and marginally reach the ' evaluate and create ' level. For example, Leung screen-captured her Scratch game and showed us how to train a machine learning model and program a chick on the screen that could respond to us using a camera with the use of AI techniques. Another student Lily trained the computer to recognise two objects (i.e., fingers and  a  lego  brick)  (see  Fig.  2). ' When  you  want  to  train  the  machine learning model, you need to collect data first and capture 30 pictures of two things. Say I use a finger and lego brick. After taking 30 pictures of them, we can set the if … then … statement That is, if the chick recognizes I show a finger, it jumps. ' This indicates that students could reflect their AI understandings in their schools and transfer their knowledge to solve some

<!-- image -->

specific problems in their story books. The rest of 14 students believed that  they  could  not  reach  this  cognitive  level  because  their  school teachers have not delivered them any AI knowledge in schools. They claimed that our learning program offered them the first experience in learning AI to create a digital book. For example, Trinity said she has learnt how to write programs to control motors and hardware, but she could not show us any AI-related artefacts that have been created before at school. This way, we could not count her to reach the cognitive level of evaluating and creating AI.

AI ethics are moral principles that involve different human-centered considerations  (e.g.,  fairness,  accountability,  transparency,  ethics). When AI-driven technologies are transforming the world, AI ethics becomes important to bring up responsible citizens to use and apply AI technologies ethically. Researchers and practitioners started to propose AI  ethical  principles  to  guide  the  different  industries  and  educate responsible citizens who could compete in using AI in a reliable, trustworthy and fair way (e.g., Hagendorff, 2020; Jobin et al., 2019).

In the workshop, an instructor introduced students to some online AI experiments such as image stylizer and Quickdraw. Quickdraw is an online  game  developed  by  Google  that  challenges  players  to  draw  a picture of an object using a neural network to guess what their drawings represent. Through the hands-on simulation of AI applications, students could recognise the importance of data bias and it is important to avoid unjust impacts on people, particularly those related to sensitive characteristics such as race, ethnicity and gender. The discussion shows how AI works in Quickdraw, and its related ethical concerns and sources of bias. For example, an instructor suggested a reason that causes ethical issues,  and  said, ' Designing  fair  and  unbiased  algorithms  is  one  of  the challenging problems nowadays in our technological world. For example, in the Quickdraw game, people perceive shoes in a different way. Some draw high heels; some draw sandals; some draw business shoes. The app will collect over millions of people ' s drawings to train the model that could recognise users ' doodles. If those datasets underrepresented or overrepresent certain groups, it ' s not a fair model. A software engineer pointed out that the image recognition algorithms in Google Photos were classifying his black friends as 'gorillas ' in 2015 ' . These learning activities foster students to explore how AI can  impact  society  in  both  positive  and  negative  ways,  and related ethical issues so that students could incorporate the ideas into their stories.

After DSW processes, we asked students whether they gained understanding on AI ethics, and how they perceive AI ethics in their stories. In the interviews, four students claimed that they did not realize the importance of AI ethics in the past but now they knew the importance of data bias and ethical concerns in AI applications. For example, students demonstrated their understanding with some examples in their digital stories such as AI-driven automatic vehicles and criminal justice systems. A student named Trinity said, ' Refer to my story Future Trip, the superheroes and good robots have AI-related functions such as voice-over and transcription. Bad enemy robots imply the misuse of AI and have potential to cause data bias. Accidents and disasters may occur. ' We then asked her what types of accidents could occur when people misuse AI technologies. She gave an example of an AI-driven robotics car and continued,

Fig. 1. Examples to stylish photos into an artwork (https://deepart.io).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

Fig. 2. Screenshot of building a machine learning model in Scratch.

<!-- image -->

' People need to handle AI with care; otherwise, it will cause danger. AI can recognise  red  and  green  colours.  However,  when  an  AI  automatic  car recognized the colour wrongly, traffic accidents could happen. It must be designed  carefully  and  accurately. ' Another  student  Max  stated, ' We should  not  use  information  ( e.g. ,  gender,  country)  to  build  a  model  to determine whether a suspect should be sent to jail. This may cause data bias. ' Overall, students demonstrated that they could develop and apply safety and  security  practices  to  avoid  unintended  consequences  that  create risks of harm. Developing AI systems should be appropriately cautious and computer scientists should develop them in accordance with effective practices in AI safety research.

Besides,  all  sixteen  students  demonstrated  in  their  stories  that  AI should benefit people to have a better living. Two of them showed their concerns that uncontrolled AI-driven robots would take over the human world and misuse of AI would cause destructive consequences such as taking revenge on humans and recovering extinct species like dinosaurs. A student Tse mentioned that governments need to set up laws for AI robots to control them from doubting humans ' decisions and destroying people. Ethical principles for computer scientists should be developed to maintain  trust  and  authority  to  make  sure  the  AI  robots  are  wellfunctioning  and  reduce  potential  risks.  Furthermore,  eleven  students designed AI robots to solve authentic problems such as reducing ocean pollution, saving endangered species and healthcare crises. For example, Kong and Yi wrote that robots are human companions which use machine learning models to create different classes to play Kung Fu (pose recognition),  make  sushi  (recommendation  engine),  classify  planets with children (image recognition). Max wrote about a robot guard with a camera, wheel shoes and cannons that can use facial recognition to prevent strangers from entering the building and catching thieves to keep the residents living there safe. Hai suggested a waiter and chef robots to release people ' s workload to cook food with different recipes whereas Sammy designed an elderly companion to help the elderly to do housework (see Fig. 3). All these examples demonstrated how students address different problems or even global challenges to build different practical AI solutions.

Overall,  all  16  students  believed  that  digital  story  writing  could enhance their motivation and ability in knowing, understanding and using  AI.  They  could  successfully  observe  authentic  problems,  apply their  prior  knowledge  and  AI  concepts  in  specific  scenarios  so  as  to create  imaginative  AI-driven  solutions  in  their  stories.  Although  students may know how to transform AI techniques such as image and pose recognition across different scenarios, they did not know how exactly they can make the real artefacts. In the instructional design, students understand the basic AI principles through age-appropriate simulations and games such as Quickdraw and image stylizers. They experienced how AI works but they had no practical experience of data training, developing a machine learning model, manipulating relevant hardware and writing programs. Without these hands-on experience, they could only  tell  the  AI  principles  behind  through  story  creation  but  hardly explain what types of machine learning techniques and programs they should adopt. As such, in the future, it is recommended that hands-on experience such as designing machine learning models, data training and writing programs to implement their ideas should be incorporated in the AI learning activities.

Furthermore,  most  students  didn ' t  exactly  tell  which  AI  ethical principles that their stories implement but all of them believed that AI systems should socially benefit people, society and the environment to maintain  sustainable  development  and  human  wellbeing.  Students consider  potential  development  and  uses  of  AI  technologies  in  their stories  ethically  to  solve  different  authentic  challenges  such  as  environmental issues and healthcare crisis as mentioned. They expanded their AI and multi-disciplinary knowledge to suggest solutions in a wide range of fields including healthcare, security, energy and entertainment.

## 4.2. Q2. What inquiry-based learning processes did students demonstrate through the DSW learning activities?

This  study  provided  qualitative  evidence  regarding  primary  students ' development of AI literacy and story writing practices throughout the three-month DSW journey. Besides teaching how students read and write their digital stories, instructors stimulated students ' inquiry on AI concepts throughout the DSW journeys and encouraged them to express

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

Fig. 3. Students ' digital story about an AI-driven waiter and health alliance.

<!-- image -->

their ideas for proposed problems in their digital stories. Inquiry-based learning is gaining popularity in STEM-related curricula and development projects (Lai, 2018). In the context of AI literacy, recent AI-driven technologies  (e.g.,  Quickdraw,  teachable  machine,  Siri,  translation) encourage students to discover new AI knowledge and applications via the inquiry process. The DSW process could not only encourage students to express their ideas, it also stimulates students ' higher-order thinking skills  and  problem-solving  to  think  forward.  In  this  way,  instead  of knowing new concepts, students could reach a higher cognitive level to research  and  solve  authentic  problems  that  were  raised  in  students ' digital  stories.  To  understand  how  students  learn  through  the  DSW learning  activities,  we  used  Pedaste  et  al.  (2015) ' s  inquiry-based learning cycle to analyze students ' DSW learning processes to develop their AI literacy via five phases: orientation, conceptualization, investigation, conclusion and discussion.

## Phase 1: Orientation - Discovering AI.

Orientation  is  the  process  of  stimulating  students ' curiosity  to introduce a topic and addressing learning challenges through problems and explorative tasks (Pedaste et al., 2015). First, instructors introduced students  to  write  a  digital  story  with  a  topic ' AI,  Robots,  Love  and

Peace ' . During the workshops, instructors provided students engaging activities  including  interesting  videos,  gamified  tasks  and  online  AI experimental  tools  to  scaffold  students ' fundamental  knowledge  and build  excitement  and  curiosity.  Instructors  facilitated  students  to explore AI knowledge through the online tools (e.g., AI Ocean at Code. org, Quickdraw, translation), and demonstrate how to solve problems by AI  technologies  (e.g.,  using  image  stylizer  to  draw  a  painting,  using AI-driven robots to collect ocean garbage). They demonstrated students practical applications of how to use AI technologies to improve human ' s life and solve global challenges including environment and healthcare issues. This learning process could enhance students ' critical thinking and problem-solving skills to connect their AI  knowledge  with real-world problems.

An instructor demonstrated some practical experience of using AIdriven tools to solve authentic problems in real-life scenarios. He told students, ' Nowadays, scientists  and  engineers  design  robots  that  use  AIvision to photograph floating objects and identify different types of marine plastic waste in the oceans to protect aquatic life. ' Then, students built a machine learning model to classify  between garbage  and  fish  in  the ocean. Later in the presentation day, a student proposed the idea of

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

making a robot in her story to help recognise toxic garbage and nongarbage by using pattern and colour recognition. ' I borrowed the idea from the teacher to use AI robots to save the ocean. It ' s about how to recycle garbage  and  ocean  pollution.  The  robots  can  recognise  and  recycle  the garbage. People use data [such as patterns and colours] to train the model which helps humans to save the ocean. ' From this story, we understand that students have applied machine learning concepts to connect to realworld situations and finally propose a solution to save aquatic life in the ocean (see Fig. 4).

After the AI learning experience, students are encouraged to read and comprehend  AI-related  comics  and  books,  and  watch  self-learning videos to gain AI concepts in their leisure time. For example, teachers demonstrated how AI could recognise fish and further clean the ocean garbage which made a student to later write his story related to AI ocean cleaner (see Fig. 5). In addition, students connect their AI knowledge with their daily life experiences (e.g., using Siri and translation) at home and schools. All these provide a core foundation for students to come up with their own ideas in the next phase.

## Phase 2: Conceptualization - Formulating problems.

Conceptualization is the process of generating questions and/or hypotheses to generate problems (Pedaste et al., 2015). The second phase conceptualization stimulated students to brainstorm with a writing plan of how they learn about their topics. Instructors asked students to come up with problems and develop possible AI-driven solutions to formulate their  storylines.  We  asked  students  interesting  questions  to stimulate their thinking. Examples of questions are: Do you remember what kind of robot Baymax is? Do you know whether Captcha is AI-related? Can robots laugh and cry? How do people use AI robots to clean the ocean? How important love and peace are to humans when designing AI robots? Furthermore,  our  team  developed  online  gamified  quizzes  through Kahoot!  (a  gamified  platform)  to  check  students ' AI  understanding. After stimulating students ' thinking via interesting questions, gamified activities and, students decided that they would like to create stories about how AI robots could clean the ocean, interact with humans with facial expressions and become health companions like Baymax which is demonstrated in students ' stories (Fig. 6a and b). All students claimed that they have done internet research to understand how AI could be applied to solve their proposed problems.

Phase 3: Investigation - Making inquiry through research.

Investigation  is  the  learning  process  of  planning  exploration  or experimentation, collecting and analysing data based on their exploration (Scanlon et al., 2011). In our DSW experience, students put together the proposed problem in the previous phase to further make inquiry and actively explore the writing topic through research, experimentation, exploration and observation. Throughout the research process, students have the opportunity to connect to real-world scenarios through observations and find solutions with teachers and parents. These learning activities stimulate students ' inquiry to encourage students to continue their learning after lessons, which can be demonstrated in the interviews from students and parents.

In the program, teachers encouraged students to formulate authentic problems that could be solved by AI technologies such as healthcare and environmental issues. Students then made inquiries through exploring the AI-driven tools and tasks throughout the AI learning lessons. After the lessons, they continued their inquiries through observation, reading and asking questions. This learning process triggered students to gain a more in-depth understanding of AI knowledge so that they could create different AI-driven characters in their stories to solve their articulated problems. This way, students need to research and naturally express the AI knowledge in their stories through making inquiries, gathering information and expressing their views. For example, a student named Elva claimed she could explore the meanings of AI through educational videos, online tools and games: ' I  enjoy the writing process. My school teachers haven ' t started to teach AI. My parents didn ' t know much about this field; they are not very tech savvy. When I have difficulties, I will search online and watch videos to find solutions. These online resources such as videos and games help me understand what AI is and enrich the content of my story. ' Leung ' s mother claimed that the workshops taught students how to raise problems and articulate solutions through reading and searching on the Internet. She could learn much about AI in this DSW experience with her daughter. ' This is a research process. My daughter and I did not know much in this area. But while I ' m looking for some interesting articles to read with my daughter, I can learn too. My daughter asked me questions and we searched for possible solutions on the Internet. She likes sharing what she knows with me too. The ideas totally originate from her though I help her organize her thinking to finally come up with her story. ' As such, reading, exploring  AI-driven  tools  and  discovering  AI  with  parents  are  useful strategies that encourage inquiry-based learning.

Fig. 4. Students ' story to propose the use of AI to clean the ocean.

<!-- image -->

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5. Teachers ' comics to illustrate how AI could recognise fish.

<!-- image -->

Source:

https://images.app.goo.gl/mXJAqvEoKtyzC9jT9

Fig. 6a. Teacher used Baymax as an example about an AI healthcare companion.

## Applications of Al 人工智能的應用

Fig. 6b. Teacher demonstrated different types of AI applications (e.g., education, business, translation).

<!-- image -->

Furthermore, collaborating with classmates to solve problems and figuring out solutions with teachers and parents are important. Students can  further  gain  collective  intelligence  and  collaborative  innovation from their teachers, parents and classmates who inspire them to create their  digital  stories.  For  example,  Chung ' s  mother  said, ' I  study  AI learning  videos  and  information  with  my  child.  Throughout  the  learning

## Do you remember what kind of robot Baymax is?

大家還記得Baymax是哪種機器人？

Personalhealthcarecompanion个人保健助理

Computer scientists are working on systems Al that can monitorthehealthoftheelderlyintheirhomesand provide alerts if they fall ill withCovid-19.

Covid-19期間，科學家正研究可以遠程視家中老年人 健康狀况，亦可以為老年人確時提供警報。

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

process, when Chung doesn ' t understand the AI learning materials, I can try to explain to him and I can learn at the same time. My child and I realize that quite many technologies found in everyday life belong to AI applications too. In the past, we weren ' t aware of that . ' Another student Hin ' s dad said, ' I teach him how to use AI-related software … He sometimes observes me on how to learn using online platforms … I hope my active learning behaviour encourages him to use eLearning and computers or even AI-related learning tools to help his study too. As such, from my observation, he knows how to self-learn, use the Internet and find good resources to learn fast. ' As such, we can see that active parental involvement is important when making inquiry to foster students ' AI literacy.

' This year, I have attended a robotics making class, and a Scratch programming class. I know how to train the computers by taking many photos in front of a camera. I have learnt how to write programs to train a machine learning model with thirty pictures, and use microprocessors and sensors to recognise an object in AI-driven Scratch games and cars. ' As such, doing research and making inquiry would be important for students to further develop their AI concepts and make their work more convincing and interesting.

## Phase 4: Conclusion - Creating stories and solutions.

Conclusion is the phase in which the basic conclusions of a project are  stated  (de  Jong,  2006).  In  this  phase,  students  addressed  their original research problems and considered whether these are supported by students ' research findings (Scanlon et al., 2011). They looked at the resources  that  they  collected  in  the  previous  stages  and  transformed what  they  have  learnt  into  students ' final  products.  In  constructing digital stories, students learnt to use technological tools and media to establish AI concepts through a digital story creation platform (Smyrnaiou et al., 2020). Students created digital stories with rich media artefacts that combined different multimedia elements such as a narrated audio text, animation and digital drawing (Boase, 2008). This combination  of  language,  visual,  and  digital  representations  is  a  powerful cognitive tool to develop and express what students ' have learnt in the 3-month writing journey. Students designed their digital stories with rich media elements such as a narrated audio text, animation and digital drawing.

A  student  believes  that  using  digital  story  writing  is  an  effective approach especially when creating digital stories, students could use multimedia creation tools which have some AI-driven applications. ' It ' s an interesting approach to let me know about AI through reading and story writing. I add cartoons and narratives for characters in the digital stories. When I use PowerPoint, I recognise the automatic style suggestion and Siri could also be AIs which are useful to make my eBook. ' A student ' s parent said: ' I work with my child to edit images and create digital content … He had difficulty in working with multimedia elements such as recording voice and creating illustrations. He tells me that Siri has voice recognition functions which could be AI ' Through this process, students find that they could use AI-driven tools such as PowerPoint style suggestions and Siri to help them design their digital stories.

## Phase  5:  Discussion  -  Communicating  and  reflecting  on  AI learning.

Discussion contains two sub-phases of communication and reflection in Pedaste et al. (2015) ' s inquiry-based learning model. First, communication can be seen as an external process where students present their stories as the project outcomes to teachers and classmates, and receive feedback and comments from them (Scanlon et al., 2011), and sometimes  listen  to  others  and  articulate  their  understandings  (Bruce &amp; Casey,  2012).  Second,  reflection  is  defined  as  an  internal  process  of reflecting on and evaluating anything in the students ' mind (e.g., What have I learnt? Why did I write this? What are the alternative options to solve the problem?). Discussions at the end of an inquiry should have students  thinking  forward  via  sharing  and  listening  to  each  other ' s stories. Throughout this process, we invited every student to share their work and present their stories in front of classmates through web-conferencing  software  in  real  time  and/or  pre-recorded  online video  sharing.  Teachers  examined  their  work  and  facilitated  the presentation  and  discussion.  Students  then  reflected  on  their  overall learning based on feedback from teachers and classmates.

One of the interviewees commented, ' In the past, I didn ' t realize that these technologies such as searching and recommendations could also have AI functions. After the training, I pay more attention than usual to recognise AIrelated technologies in my daily life. ' Another student reflected, ' When I ' m listening to others ' stories, I learn that AI can impact society in both positive and negative ways. It makes me think of other possible solutions and endings to improve my story. ' A teacher observed that children could learn from each  other  through  reading  other  digital  stories  and  watching  their presentations: ' The presentation is like a celebration for children to show their work. The learning environment is positive. All students can present their stories and use AI to solve the problem proposed in their books. At the same time, they reflect on themselves based on other work, and share their finalised stories and writing experience with teachers and classmates. '

Overall, inquiry-based learning is a meaningful approach to develop students ' AI literacy that stimulates them to raise questions, ideas and observations.  It  gives  students  hands-on  experience,  methods  and practices similar to those of professional scientists in order to construct AI  knowledge.  It  can  be  defined  as  a  process  of  discovering  new knowledge, with the learner formulating hypotheses and testing them by conducting  experiments  and/or  making  observations  (Pedaste  et  al., 2015).

## 5. Conclusion

Digital  story  writing  has  emerged  as  a  powerful  inquiry-based pedagogical tool across all disciplines by providing various direct and indirect advantages for the learners. This present study investigated the contribution of DSW as a pedagogy to develop four aspects of fostering AI literacy among upper primary students. We observed that all students perceived positively towards the DSW learning process and achieved up to higher cognition level. All of the stories demonstrated their understanding of AI concepts and skills (e.g., What is AI, supervised learning, neural network, AI-driven tools) and have reached the cognitive level of ' use and apply AI ' . Through student interviews, some of them reflected the DSW experience on their everyday and school AI learning, and told us that DSW could facilitate them to evaluate and create AI artefacts by showing their AI creation such as computer programs and models that they built in their schools. On top of this, students could realize the importance of AI ethics and its social impacts such as algorithmic bias and consequences of misuse of AI through different learning activities.

In addition, we applied Pedaste et al. (2015) ' s inquiry-based learning cycle to analyze students ' DSW learning processes to develop their AI literacy  via  five  phases  (orientation,  conceptualization,  investigation, conclusion and discussion). First, we scaffold students ' AI concepts and skills  through  hands-on  activities  such  as  Teachable  Machine,  image stylizing, translation. After exploring AI, students could formulate their problems and make inquiries through research. This involves students to search information, gather evidence, reflect on their experience, and present their knowledge in their own way. Ultimately, students could make up their stories and express their ideas using media and technologies in the digital story creation platform. They located and designed images and artefacts to make their text and content meaningful. This process requires students ' critical awareness to convey the meaning of their stories and incidentally enhance students ' media, technology and AI literacy.

The present study showed some limitations that need to be addressed in future research. First of all, the sample size was so small that only 16 students were interviewed and their work was analysed. The number of samples was less than one third of the total number in the DSW program. The  qualitative  artefact-based  analysis  provides  us  a  comprehensive view of the primary students ' development in AI through digital story writing. However, it may not provide generalizable results for a wider population, and future studies should broaden the sample. Furthermore, the results of this study might be subject to limited generalizability as

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

the interview and work analysis were implemented in selected groups who performed well in the program. Students with better performance could be more likely to develop their AI literacy than the other lowachieving  students.  In  the  future,  we  could  also  interview  the  lowachievers to tell us the challenges they met throughout the DSW journey.

Based on the outcomes of this study, the authors offer recommendations for educators to integrate future DSW and AI literacy courses and enhance students ' learning performance. Firstly,  reading and writing have been reconceptualized as effective ways to explore a knowledge domain enroute to acquiring new knowledge for decades (McGinley &amp; Tierney, 1988). To foster students ' AI literacy, teachers could engage them in reading AI-themed fictions and/or non-fictions, and hands-on experience  such  as  tasting  different  AI-driven  tools.  After  the  activities, students could transform their knowledge and experience to story ideas in terms of writing purposes, genres, contents, audiences and roles. In this way, students can re-express their AI knowledge to model their scenes based on multiple sources including teacher, parent and classmate interaction, and the author/expert views learnt from their reading. On top of enhancing students ' traditional writing skills, new literacy skills such as research via the internet, online communication and using (AI-driven) digital tools could reinforce student digital story creation.

On the other hand, pedagogies of digital story writing should  be considered  to  facilitate  students  throughout  their  writing  processes (Kearney, 2011). Before making their own books, brainstorming skills like observations, drawing (collaborative) mind maps, and sharing ideas with other people. During the writing process, students could build their narrative texts, produce the multimedia elements and format their books with a technological infrastructure including multimedia editing software and other AI-driven tools (e.g., proofreading, translation, artwork generation). At the end of the writing activities, teachers need to give formative  feedback  and  assess  their  digital  stories  via  presentations, demonstrations and video production, and further encourage students to refine and improve their work. Teachers can set up evaluation rubrics, examine students ' understanding of AI concepts and skills, and explore their misconceptions from their stories by raising follow-up questions (e. g., What types of AI concepts have the students mentioned? How do you relate the content with the concepts? Why can the solutions solve the problem?)  Third,  communication  and  collaboration  are  important throughout the DSW and AI literacy learning. Teachers should formulate groups for students to share their views and co-construct their digital stories. They should mediate group discussions to extend their concepts and skill development. Moreover, a well-established online community like the platform we used in this study (Storyjumper) allows students (throughout the program or from outside) to appreciate each other ' s work and provide constructive feedback and ideas (Yamaç et al., 2020).

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Appendix 1. Interview protocol

## A. Questions for parents

You are invited to participate in interviews to give valuable feedback on the AI Digital Story Writing journey. The questions prepared below are for interviewing parents:

1.  How do you support your children to learn AI at home?
2.  Can you comment on the STEM environment at your home? Do you encourage your children to learn/use AI outside the classroom?
3.  What are the difficulties that you find in engaging your children in learning/using AI outside the classroom?
4.  During the DSW journey, how do you enhance your children ' s AI knowledge? What/How ' s your role?
5.  During the DSW journey, how do you facilitate your children to learn these concepts/support their writing processes?
6.  Do you see any improvements in AI literacy among your children after  the  implementation of this project? If so, can you elaborate what they have learnt?
7.  Based on your observation, what do your children benefit through this project by using digital story writing? What AI concepts have you learned when reading and creating stories? Are your children more interested in learning AI? (e.g., Knowing AI, Using AI, Creating with AI, AI ethics)

## B. Questions for students

Students who are involved in this research will be invited to participate  in  interviews.  The  sample  questions  prepared  below  are  for interviewing students.

1.  Do  you  like  learning  AI?  How  do  your  teachers  and  parents encourage you to learn AI?
2.  How about your classmates? Do they like AI too and do you enjoy writing AI stories and learning AI together?
3.  What are the difficulties that you find to learn AI in this Digital Story Writing Competition?
4.  Are you interested in learning AI?
5.  Do you know what AI is? What AI concepts have you learnt in terms of knowing AI, using AI, creating with AI, and AI ethics.
6.  Do  you know how to use AI in everyday life? You may give one example.
7.  Do you know how to evaluate and create things (e.g. story) with AI? You may give one example.

## References

Ackermann, E. (2001). Piaget ' s constructivism, Papert ' s constructionism: What ' s the difference. Future of learning group publication, 5 (3), 438 -449.

- Ahmad, M. A., Teredesai, A., &amp; Eckert, C. (2020). January). Fairness, accountability, transparency in AI at scale: Lessons from national programs. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency , 690-690.

Ashbrook, P. (2013). The STEM of inquiry. Science and Children, 51 (2), 30 -31.

- Barber, J. F. (2016). Digital storytelling: New opportunities for humanities scholarship and pedagogy. Cogent Arts &amp; Humanities, 3 (1), Article 1181037.

Boase, J. (2008). Personal networks and the personal communication system: Using multiple media to connect. Information, Communication &amp; Society, 11 (4), 490 -508.

- Brennan, K., &amp; Resnick, M. (2012, April). New frameworks for studying and assessing the development of computational thinking. In Proceedings of the 2012 annual meeting of the American educational research association, Vancouver, Canada (Vol. 1), 25.
- Bruce, B. C., &amp; Casey, L. (2012). The practice of inquiry: A pedagogical 'sweet spot ' for digital literacy? Computers in the Schools, 29 (1 -2), 191 -206.
- Burgsteiner, H., Kandlhofer, M., &amp; Steinbauer, G. (2016). March). Irobot: Teaching the basics of artificial intelligence in high schools. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (Vol. 30), 1.
- Chu, S. K. W., Reynolds, R. B., Tavares, N. J., Notari, M., &amp; Lee, C. W. Y. (2021). 21st century skills development through inquiry-based learning from theory to practice . Springer International Publishing.
- Creswell, J. W., Klassen, A. C., Plano Clark, V. L., &amp; Smith, K. C. (2011). Best practices for mixed methods research in the health sciences . Bethesda (Maryland): National Institutes of Health, 2013.
- Dougherty, D. (2012). The maker movement. Innovations: Technology, governance, globalization, 7 (3), 11 -14.
- Druga, S., Vu, S. T., Likhith, E., &amp; Qiu, T. (2019). Inclusive AI literacy for kids around the world. Proceedings of FabLearn , 104 -111, 2019.

Eisenlauer, V., &amp; Karatza, S. (2020). Multimodal literacies: Media affordances, semiotic resources and discourse communities. Journal of Visual Literacy, 39 (3 -4), 125 -131.

Frazel, M. (2010). Digital storytelling guide for educators . Washington, DC: International Society for Technology in Education.

- Ghallab, M. (2019). Responsible AI: Requirements and challenges. AI Perspectives, 1 (1), 1 -7.
- Gong, X., Tang, Y., Liu, X., Jing, S., Cui, W., Liang, J., &amp; Wang, F. Y. (2020). October). K-9 artificial intelligence education in Qingdao: Issues, challenges and suggestions. In 2020 IEEE international Conference on networking, Sensing and control (ICNSC) (pp. 1 -6). IEEE.
- Green, L. S. (2013). Language learning through a lens: The case for digital storytelling in the second language classroom. School Libraries Worldwide, 19 (2), 23 -36.

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,

- Gubrium, A. (2009). Digital storytelling: An emergent method for health promotion research and practice. Health Promotion Practice, 10 (2), 186 -191.
- Hafner, C. A., &amp; Miller, L. (2011). Fostering learner autonomy in English for science: A collaborative digital video project in a technological learning environment. Language, Learning and Technology, 15 (3), 68 -86.
- Hagendorff, T. (2020). The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guidelines. Minds and . Machines, 30 (1), 99 -120.
- Han, X., Hu, F., Xiong, G., Liu, X., Gong, X., Niu, X., … Wang, X. (2018). Design of AI + curriculum for primary and secondary schools in Qingdao. In 2018 Chinese automation congress (CAC) (pp. 4135 -4140). IEEE.
- Harrison, R. L., &amp; Parks, B. (2017). How STEM can gain some STEAM: Crafting meaningful collaborations between STEM disciplines and inquiry-based writing programs. In Writing program and writing center collaborations (pp. 117 -139). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Hill, S., &amp; Grinnell, C. (2014). October). Using digital storytelling with infographics in STEM professional writing pedagogy. In 2014 IEEE international professional communication conference (IPCC) (pp. 1 -7). IEEE.
- How, M. L., &amp; Hung, W. L. D. (2019). Educing AI-thinking in science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM) education. Education Sciences, 9 (3), 184.
- Hughes, J., Gadanidis, G., &amp; Yiu, C. (2017). Digital making in elementary mathematics education. Digital Experiences in Mathematics Education, 3 (2), 139 -153.
- Jobin, A., Ienca, M., &amp; Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1 (9), 389 -399.
- November Johnson, K. (2019). AI ethics is all about power . Venturebeat Insider - The Machine Making Sense of AI. Retrieved from https://venturebeat.com/2019/11/11/ ai-ethics-is-all-about-power/.
- de Jong, T. (2006). Scaffolds for scientific discovery learning. Handling complexity in learning environments. Theory and Research , 107 -128.
- Julie, H., Alyson, H., &amp; Anne-Sophie, C. (2020). Designing digital literacy activities: An interdisciplinary and collaborative approach. In 2020 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) (pp. 1 -5). IEEE.
- Kaeophanuek, S., Na-Songkhla, J., &amp; Nilsook, P. (2019). A learning process model to enhance digital literacy using critical inquiry through digital storytelling (CIDST). International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 14 (3).
- Kandlhofer, M., Steinbauer, G., Hirschmugl-Gaisch, S., &amp; Huber, P. (2016). October). Artificial intelligence and computer science in education: From kindergarten to university. In 2016 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) (pp. 1 -9). IEEE.
- Kearney, M. (2011). A learning design for student-generated digital storytelling. Learning, Media and Technology, 36 (2), 169 -188.
- Lai, C. S. (2018). Using inquiry-based strategies for enhancing students ' STEM education learning. Journal of Education in Science Environment and Health, 4 (1), 110 -117.
- Laurillard, D., Charlton, P., Craft, B., Dimakopoulos, D., Ljubojevic, D., Magoulas, G., … Whittlestone, K. (2013). A constructionist learning environment for teachers to model learning designs. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 29 (1), 15 -30.
- Leahy, D., &amp; Dolan, D. (2010). Digital literacy: A vital competence for 2010?. In IFIP international conference on key competencies in the knowledge society (pp. 210 -221). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
- Lee, I., Ali, S., Zhang, H., DiPaola, D., &amp; Breazeal, C. (2021). Developing middle school students ' AI literacy. In Proceedings of the 52nd ACM technical symposium on computer science education (pp. 191 -197). ACM.
- Long, D., &amp; Magerko, B. (2020). April). What is AI literacy? Competencies and design considerations. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1 -16). ACM.
- McGinley, W., &amp; Tierney, R. J. (1988). Reading and writing as ways of knowing and learning . Center for the Study of Reading Technical Report. No. 423.
- Ng, D. T. K., &amp; Chu, S. K. W. (2021a). Motivating students to learn AI through social networking sites: A case study in Hong Kong. Online Learning, 25 (1), 195 -208.
- Ng, D. T. K., &amp; Chu, S. K. W. (2021b). Motivating students to learn STEM via engaging flight simulation activities. Journal of Science Education and Technology , 1 -22.
- Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, K. W. S., &amp; Qiao, M. S. (2021a). AI literacy: Definition, teaching, evaluation and ethical issues. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 58 (1), 504 -509.
- Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, K. W. S., &amp; Qiao, M. S. (2021b). Conceptualizing AI literacy: An exploratory review. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence, 2 , Article 100041.
- Ng, T. K., Ng, H. L., &amp; Chu, S. K. W. (2021). Engaging students in creative music making with musical instrument application in an online flipped classroom. Education and Information Technologies , 1 -20.
- Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas . Basic books. Pedaste, M., M ¨ aeots, M., Siiman, L. A., De Jong, T., Van Riesen, S. A., Kamp, E. T., … Tsourlidaki, E. (2015). Phases of inquiry-based learning: Definitions and the inquiry cycle. Educational Research Review, 14 , 47 -61.
- Rodríguez-García, J. D., Moreno-Le ´ on, J., Rom ´ an-Gonz ´ alez, M., &amp; Robles, G. (2020). Introducing artificial intelligence fundamentals with LearningML: Artificial intelligence made easy. In Eighth international conference on technological ecosystems for enhancing multiculturality (pp. 18 -20). ACM.
- Scanlon, E., Anastopoulou, S., Kerawalla, L., &amp; Mulholland, P. (2011). How technology resources can be used to represent personal inquiry and support students ' understanding of it across contexts. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27 (6), 516 -529.
- Smyrnaiou, Z., Georgakopoulou, E., &amp; Sotiriou, S. (2020). Promoting a mixed-design model of scientific creativity through digital storytelling -the CCQ model for creativity. International Journal of STEM Education, 7 (1), 1 -22.
- Uccelli, P., Galloway, E. P., Barr, C. D., Meneses, A., &amp; Dobbs, C. L. (2015). Beyond vocabulary: Exploring cross-disciplinary academic-language proficiency and its association with reading comprehension. Reading Research Quarterly, 50 (3), 337 -356.
- Vazhayil, A., Shetty, R., Bhavani, R. R., &amp; Akshay, N. (2019). Focusing on teacher education to introduce ai in schools: Perspectives and illustrative findings. In 2019 IEEE tenth international conference on technology for education (T4E) (pp. 71 -77). IEEE. December.
- Wecker, C., Kohnle, C., &amp; Fischer, F. (2007). Computer literacy and inquiry learning: When geeks learn less. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23 (2), 133 -144.
- Wong, G. K., Ma, X., Dillenbourg, P., &amp; Huan, J. (2020). Broadening artificial intelligence education in K-12: Where to start? ACM Inroads, 11 (1), 20 -29.
- Woo, M. M., Chu, S. K. W., &amp; Li, X. (2013). Peer-feedback and revision process in a wiki mediated collaborative writing. Educational Technology Research and Development, 61 (2), 279 -309.
- Wu, F., Lu, C., Zhu, M., Chen, H., Zhu, J., Yu, K., … Pan, Y. (2020). Towards a new generation of artificial intelligence in China. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2 (6), 312 -316.
- Yamaç, A., ¨ Oztürk, E., &amp; Mutlu, N. (2020). Effect of digital writing instruction with tablets on primary school students ' writing performance and writing knowledge. Computers &amp; Education, 157 , Article 103981.
- Yang, Y. F. D. (2012). Multimodal composing in digital storytelling. Computers and Composition, 29 (3), 221 -238.
- Yuksel, P., Robin, B., &amp; McNeil, S. (2011). Educational uses of digital storytelling all around the world. In Society for information technology &amp; teacher education international conference (pp. 1264 -1271). Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).
- Zhang, M., &amp; Quintana, C. (2012). Scaffolding strategies for supporting middle school students ' online inquiry processes. Computers &amp; Education, 58 (1), 181 -196.

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;,