---
source_file: Singer_2023_AI_Creates_the_Message_Integrating_AI_Language.pdf
conversion_date: 2026-02-03T09:24:16.849146
converter: docling
quality_score: 95
---

<!-- image -->

## Journal of Social Work Education

ISSN: 1043-7797 (Print) 2163-5811 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uswe20

## AI Creates the Message: Integrating AI Language Learning Models into Social Work Education and Practice

Jonathan B. Singer, Johanna Creswell Báez &amp; Juan A. Rios

To cite this article: Jonathan B. Singer, Johanna Creswell Báez &amp; Juan A. Rios (2023) AI Creates the Message: Integrating AI Language Learning Models into Social Work Education and Practice, Journal of Social Work Education, 59:2, 294-302, DOI: 10.1080/10437797.2023.2189878

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/10437797.2023.2189878

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 12 Apr 2023.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 4041

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 41 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## INVITED EDITORIAL

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## AI Creates the Message: Integrating AI Language Learning Models into Social Work Education and Practice

Jonathan B. Singer , Johanna Creswell Báez ,  and Juan A. Rios

<!-- image -->

ChatGPT,  the  OpenAI  language  model,  has  been  making  waves  in  the  world  of  technology  and education. While its ability to generate human-like responses has been praised by some, others have raised concerns about its effect on social work education and the ethical considerations surrounding its  use.  In  this  editorial,  we  will  explore  the  pros  and  cons  of  ChatGPT  in  social  work  education; provide  recommendations  for  using  ChatGPT  in  teaching,  research,  and  practice;  and  suggest a possible future for social work with artificial intellience (AI).

The title of this editorial, 'AI Creates the Message,' is a reference to the past and the future. In 2014, the Journal of Social Work Education published an editorial called 'The Medium is the Message' about the possibilities that social media held for 'radical changes in [social work] education' (Robbins &amp; Singer, 2014, p. 387). That title was itself a reference to Marshal McLuhan's famous 1964 proclamation about the importance of understanding and thinking critically about mediums used to communicate messages, not just the messages themselves.

Today, we are at the dawn of a new era, one where technologies like ChatGPT do not just broadcast (as  in  Twitter)  or  display  (as  in  Instagram)  the  messages  we  write,  but  they  write  the  messages themselves.  As  an  example,  the  first  paragraph  of  this  editorial  was  written  by  ChatGPT  with  the prompt, 'Write a 500-word editorial arguing the pros and cons of ChatGPT in social work education, research and practice.' If you just reread the first paragraph (a reasonable thing to do) how do you feel knowing it was generated by AI? Are you excited about the possibilities or terrified by the implications? The prospects of unregulated AI prompted members of the U.S. House and Senate to talk with OpenAI's chief executive officer, Sam Altman, 8 weeks after ChatGPT was made available to the public (Lieu, 2023). Are you wondering whether using ChatGPT's generated content is considered plagiarism (it is not) or whether ChatGPT can be listed as a fourth author (it cannot)? Publishers have already determined that AI programs like ChatGPT cannot assume ethical responsibility for content because each  person  owns  the  output  you  create  (OpenAI,  n.d.)  and  publishers  have  already  decided  that programs like ChatGPT cannot be listed as an author (Sample, 2023) Figure 1.

## A brief primer on AI mostly not written by ChatGPT

AI  is  a  rapidly  growing  field  involving  the  simulation  of  human-like  functions  using  algorithmic computing  that  expands  the  notion  of  person  and  environment  (Goldkind,  2021).  AI  systems  are designed  to  perform  human  cognitive  functions,  such  as  learning,  problem  solving,  and  pattern recognition.  For  example,  computer  algorithms  have  been  used  in  customer  service  for  decades. When you hear 'this call may be recorded for training purposes,' AI is processing the words you are saying in real time, putting your call into a category, and recommending to the call representative responses that have the highest likelihood of resolving your concern (Steiner, 2013). The field of AI is diverse  and  encompasses  a  wide  range  of  subfields,  including  machine  learning,  computer  vision (facial  recognition),  and  natural  language processing (NLP). One subfield of AI that is particularly relevant  to  social  work  is  NLP  or  'chatbots,'  which  involve  the  use  of  algorithms  to  understand, interpret, and generate human language (Asakura et al., 2020).

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Image created by Jonathan Singer with the AI generator, Midjourney (version 4), with the prompt: 'Social workers looking behind a curtain at a massive computer with lots of wires, steampunk, unreal engine, eternal space.'

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

One  example  of  an  NLP-based  AI  system  is  ChatGPT,  a  language  model  developed  by  OpenAI. ChatGPT is trained on a massive dataset of text to generate human-like responses to prompts. ChatGPT was trained on data from the internet through 2021 and written by humans (OpenAI, n.d.). However, this AI model is continually being trained by those who are using the system and adjusts as it learns relationships between inputs and desired outputs to create patterns in the data. ChatGPT and similar models are designed to improve with every user input (OpenAI, 2022). The result is a rapidly evolving system that will likely be able to train itself one day Figure 2.

## Why should social work care?

Picture a world where social work education and practice are revolutionized by the next wave of AI technology innovation (Mintz et al., 2018). It's a world where AI offers new tools and resources for learning and practice, providing indispensable support for social workers in their mission to address society's most pressing problems (Bidwell &amp; Báez, 2023). But with great power comes great responsibility:  social  workers  must  play  a  pivotal  role  in  helping  AI  developers  understand  how  these technologies can either exacerbate or alleviate existing social and structural inequities (Patton, 2020).

The Social Work Health Futures Lab has identified AI as one of the top three trends to consider, right alongside climate change and the fight for a just and equitable society (Nissen, 2021; Zaidi, 2020). The importance of technology should come as no surprise. For years, the implicit goal of the Social Work Grand Challenge, 'Harness Technology for Social Good,' has been to convince social workers that  information  and  communication  technologies  are  essential  to  our  practice,  scholarship,  and education (Singer et al., 2022).

Figure 2. Image created by Jonathan Singer with the AI generator, Midjourney (version 4), with the prompt: 'Social worker reading a giant book, open to pages that are made up of large and small words, unreal engine, steampunk, eternal space, circle background.'

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The COVID-19 pandemic has only accelerated this trend, making it abundantly clear that we must reckon with a 'technologically evolved human ecosystem' (Goldkind, 2021, p. 373). Students need  real-time  experience  and  practice  with  the  opportunities  and  challenges  of  AI.  As a  generative  technology,  AI  will  integrate  more  seamlessly  into  social  work  than  the  social media described in the 2014 editorial because social work often involves analyzing large amounts of data and using an informed decision-making process. AI can help as a tool to support some of these  processes  and  assist  social  workers  in  identifying  patterns,  trends,  and  potential  solutions. Further,  AI  could  help  social  workers  personalize  their  approaches  by  providing  more  tailored recommendations. It's time for social work educators to play a greater role in teaching, learning, developing, and researching AI technologies (Asakura et al., 2020; Dali &amp; Caidi, 2022; Goldkind, 2021; Hodgson et al., 2022).

Some institutions have already taken the lead in this regard. The Columbia School of Social Work offers a minor in Emerging Technology, Media and Society (Patton &amp; Cogburn, 2019), while the University of Southern California (USC) has a Center for AI in Society (USC Center for AI in Society, n.d.). Eric Rice, cofounder and director of USC's Center for AI in Society, has coedited a guide to using AI for social good that explores approaches and ethical principles for using AI in social work practice (Tambe &amp; Rice, 2018). And the Brown School at Washington University in St. Louis offers a postmaster's certificate on AI (Brown School, 2021).

The bottom line is this: We believe it is unethical for social workers not to learn and teach about technology-mediated social work. With AI poised to transform the way we approach social work, we must embrace this change and work together to ensure that it is used in ways that are ethical, equitable, and socially just.

## Embracing ChatGPT as a tool for faculty

The following are some examples and ideas for using AI in social work education:

- (1) Developing or revising a syllabus . If you are developing or revising a syllabus, consider asking ChatGPT to identify 14 topics that should be covered in a course on 'X.' Then, ask ChatGPT to write a 14-week syllabus, with each week focusing on one of the topics identified, as well as identifying three peer-reviewed journal articles and one podcast episode for each week. As with all the examples, the results must be checked for accuracy.
- (2) Creating tests, quizzes, or tailored assignments . Faculty have limited time and resources to update and tailor educational materials. ChatGPT has unlimited time and resources to create resources for various specialized areas or subgroups, explain and provide a breakdown on the material, create scenarios of potential outcomes of designed thinking, and collectively worldbuild.
- (3) Responding  to  a  student .  If  you  need  to  craft  a  diplomatic  e-mail  to  a  student,  but  are concerned about the tone, ask ChatGPT to 'write an e-mail addressing the following topics and suggest three solutions in a supportive tone.' Or, put in the student's e-mail (removing identifying information) and ask it to respond to this e-mail in a supportive tone.
- (4) Generating  ideas .  When  you  are  generating  ideas,  ChatGPT  can  create  outlines  based  on informational  prompts.  For  example,  you  can  provide  an  abstract  or  overview  and  ask ChatGPT  for  an  outline.  ChatGPT  can  also  help  identify  visual  metaphors  for  different concepts you want to illustrate in your teaching (e.g., the root causes of trauma as a tree with roots and branches).
- (5) Writing dialog .  ChatGPT excels at writing realistic dialog. For example, 'Write a one paragraph story about a 13-year-old who is angry with her parents and runs away. Include dialog between the daughter and her mother in Spanish.' This prompt resulted in a realistic scenario with grammatically accurate English and Spanish Figure 3.
- (6) Using ChatGPT for research . ChatGPT can be used for quantitative and qualitative analysis. How many times have you wracked your brain trying to think  of  the  code  for  running  an analysis on SAS or Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS)? ChatGPT can generate code for SAS and SPSS. Are you tired of manually converting point totals to letter grades at the end of the semester? Ask ChatGPT to write an Excel formula. If the code or formulas are not correct  the  first  time,  let  ChatGPT  know  so  that  it  can  learn,  as  sometimes  it  takes  several 'chats' to produce the correct code. Qualitative researchers can also enter de-identified interview text and ask ChatGPT to identify the emotional tone of the text, summarize the main ideas, or anything else you want to know to help with theme development or analysis.
- (7) Editing manuscripts . ChatGPT can be asked via a prompt to update sentences or paragraphs for grammar and style. A sentence could easily be updated into the active voice or you could ask it to update the sentence to be more persuasive. We have found ourselves using ChatGPT more and more as our personal editor or to double-check the grammar and style for sentences.

## Embracing ChatGPT as a tool for students

The following are some examples and ideas for using AI with social work students:

- (1) Improving  engagement  and  learning  outcomes .  A  systematic  review  of  chatbots  found improved learning and subjective satisfaction from learners. Further, as research advances on ChatGPT,  we  might  be  able  to  better  understand  the  differences  between  students  using ChatGPT  in  learning  activities  compared  with  traditional  lecture-style  methods  (Kuhail et al., 2022).
- (2) Editing papers . Using ChatGPT to improve grammar and flow can be particularly helpful to students who struggle with written communication and might need extra support. Although university  writing  centers  can  sometimes  provide  this  support,  it  can  be  more  efficient  and time-wise effective to use ChatGPT.
- (3) Deepening  their  understanding  of  key  social  work  concepts .  ChatGPT  can  be  used  to augment learning in the classroom, such as providing definitions and ways to explore through chat prompts key concepts and theories in social work
- (4) Supporting  time  management  and  study  strategies .  Students  can  use  ChatGPT  to  create plans for staying organized and managing stress. ChatGPT could provide a personalized chart for supporting time to study and time to relax.
- (5) Generating project ideas . Prompts can help assist students with literature review searches, by helping to identify gaps in the research and relevant sources.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Screenshot of ChatGPT 3.5 prompt and partial response.

<!-- image -->

## Discussing AI in your syllabus

When integrating or restricting the use of language learning models such as ChatGPT in social work  courses,  it  is  crucial  to  use  openness,  fairness,  and  provide  context  in  the  course  syllabi as  well  as  talking  directly  with  students.  The  syllabi  should  specify  how  the  technology  will  be used  during  the  course,  as  well  as  any  applicable  constraints.  This  transparency  allows students to comprehend what is expected of them and facilitates clear communication between student  and  instructor.  For  instance,  certain  technologies  may  only  be  applicable  during specific  assignments  or  in  class  discussions.  Providing  this  background  can  aid  in  ensuring that  students  know  when  they  are  able  to  access  and  apply  ChatGPT  technology.  In  addition,

<!-- image -->

as  this  technology  is  new  and  developing,  instructors  might  need  to  revisit  their  policies  on ChatGPT  to  adapt  to  the  students  learning  or  with  new  insights.

Many universities have issued formal guidelines to instructors on the use of ChatGPT. For example, Columbia University's  Center  for  Teaching  and  Learning  has  provided  an  excellent  resource  with additional related linked resources, 'Considerations for AI Tools in the Classroom' (Columbia Center for Teaching and Learning, n.d.). Some additional ideas to consider for your syllabus include:

- (1) Adding official  language  about  academic  integrity  and  address  AI-assisted  plagiarism  to  set clear expectations for students about submitting authentic and original work.
- (2) Noting when you will use AI detector services like GPTZero to check for AI-generated text.
- (3) Reviewing assignments when developing your syllabus with colleagues to ensure that they are asking for critical thinking or integration of personal experiences in a way that could not be replicated by AI.

## Acknowledging the current limitations of AI in social work education

The following are some examples and ways that AI is limiting in social work education:

- (1) Producing incorrect answers . ChatGPT's knowledge is based on the data on which it was trained through 2021, and its responses may be limited by the range and quality of those data. ChatGPT might also misunderstand a prompt or produce biased responses that reflect the data on which it was trained. For example, on February 17, 2023, ChatGPT identified only White social workers in response to the prompt 'who were the founders of the profession of social work?'
- (2) ChatGPT is  not  a  trained  and  experienced  social  worker .  Although  ChatGPT  can  sound sentient at times, it is a machine that lacks the ability to understand and empathize, along with not having hands-on experience in social work. While it might be able to develop a logical and seemingly accurate treatment plan, AI language models do not have the experience to know if the treatment plan is reasonable.
- (3) Simulated  dialog .  Although  students  practice  asking  basic  interview  questions,  the  current version of ChatGPT does not allow the program to simulate a person with a disability, psychiatric illness, nor will it pretend to have engaged in unlawful acts. For example, we asked ChatGPT to pretend to have bipolar disorder. The response was, 'As an AI language model, I cannot pretend to have bipolar disorder, as that would not be ethical or respectful to those who truly live with the condition. However, I can tell you what bipolar disorder is and how it can affect someone's life.'
- (4) ChatGPT could perpetuate bias and discrimination .  ChatGPT is trained on a dataset that reflects the biases and limitations of the data on which it has been trained. It is important to be aware of these limitations and address any potential biases and discriminatory effects in the use of ChatGPT.
- (5) ChatGPT  does  not  ensure  privacy  and  confidentiality .  Information  that  is  provided  to ChatGPT can be reviewed by OpenAI trainers to improve their system or to ensure compliance with their policies and safety requirements. We need to be thoughtful with the information provided in our prompts to not release confidential student or client information.
- (6) ChatGPT  needs  ethical  consideration .  This  tool  is  not  intended  to  be  used  to  promote plagiarism.  In  discussing  ChatGPT  with  students,  we  need  to  frame  this  as  a  tool,  not  as a stand-alone text generator for academic work. We can talk with students about how to use this  ethically  following  academic  guidelines,  such  as  updating  information  generated  by ChatGPT with social work references and cross-checking output.

<!-- image -->

## ChatGPT in social work practice: Technological justice

In his writings, author (Cyberpunk Pioneer William Gibson, 1993) famously said that '[t]he future is already here-it's just not very evenly distributed.' This idea begs the question of whether it is ethical and just to allow ChatGPT's powerful capabilities to be limited to only a select group of individuals in society. We believe social workers have an ethical responsibility to provide education, support, and access to those who have historically been excluded from technological advances to bridge the gap in technological justice. This is another form of cultural capital that can help to dismantle oppressive systems of socioeconomic division.

Within the first two months of public access to ChatGPT, social workers were already using the platform to address concrete social work problems. In fact, @socialworkmentor, a YouTuber, published a series of videos that demonstrated how he used ChatGPT to create treatment plans and write child welfare reports (https://www.youtube.com/@socialworkmentor). One of us (JR) used ChatGPT as  an  advocacy  tool  with  clients  to  write  letters  to  case  workers  for  visitation  changes,  letters  to employers requesting raises based on performance, and letters to probation officers advocating for liberties.

## The future of AI in social work

The  advent  of  ChatGPT  has  understandably  stirred  up  excitement  in  academic,  professional,  and client  communities,  with  its  potential  to  revolutionize  the  way  we  operate.  However,  we  must  be cautious of the idea of a 'tech utopia' and not assume that technology alone can solve all our problems. As noted by Leopold (2007), the notion that technology alone can resolve social problems, bring about equity, or eliminate bias is misguided. The technology is simply a tool to improve our efficiency and effectiveness, not a cure-all for practice or education issues.

The effectiveness of this tool depends on our ability to think creatively, ethically, and divergently, and how well we integrate it into our thinking. Those of us who are excited about the potentials of technology can be dismissive of social workers who are uncomfortable with technology. We can be dismissive when we assume that our colleagues' discomfort comes from a place of not knowing or not wanting to learn. If, however, that discomfort comes from a recognition that there is some aspect of technology that seems to be inconsistent with social work knowledge, values, and skills, then we need to  honor  that.  Although  the  profession  of  social  work  has  historically  been  reluctant  to  embrace technology,  as  we  progress  toward  an  increasingly  technology-driven  future,  it  is  crucial  that  we remain vigilant and ethical in our integration of these innovations (Hitchcock et al., 2018; Parga &amp; Schwartz, 2023; Sage &amp; Singer, 2022). Our profession must engage in practices that incorporate social workers into tech design spaces and tech legislative oversight to center our values of human dignity and social justice.  Social  workers  are  often  tasked  with  responding  to  complex  and  interconnected problems at the micro, mezzo, and macro levels, which due to their difficulty or impossibility to solve are  commonly  referred  to  as  'wicked  problems'  (Rittel  &amp;  Webber,  1973).  We  believe  that a  fundamental  question  moving  forward  is, How can  social  workers  use  language  learning  models such as ChatGPT to exponentially grow our collective knowledge in addressing these wicked problems?

## Acknowledgement

The first two images in this editorial were created by Jonathan Singer on his paid membership account to the AI art generator, Midjourney. The third image is a screenshot of ChatGPT.

## Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

## Notes on contributors

Jonathan B. Singer is Professor at Loyola University of Chicago School of Social Work. Johanna Creswell Báez is Assistant Professor at University of Colorado College of Public Service. Juan A. Rios is Assistant Professor at Seton Hall University, Department of Sociology, Anthropology, Social Work and Criminal Justice.

## ORCID

Jonathan B. Singer http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7941-5529 Johanna Creswell Báez http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3217-5502 Juan A. Rios http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2801-8221

## References

- Asakura, K., Occhiuto, K., Todd, S., Leithead, C., &amp; Clapperton, R. (2020). A call to action on artificial intelligence and social  work  education:  Lessons  learned  from  a  simulation  project  using  natural  language  processing. Journal  of Teaching in Social Work , 40 (5), 501-518. https://doi.org/10.1080/08841233.2020.1813234
- Bidwell, L., &amp; Báez, J. C. (2023, January 13). The impact of ChatGPT and AI on higher education: Navigating the rapidly changing  landscape. Medium .  https://medium.com/@jc2515/the-impact-of-chatgpt-and-ai-on-higher-educationdca7f579deca
- Brown School. (2021, September 26). Brown School connects artificial intelligence to social work, public health through open  classroom  and  new  courses .  Washington  University  in  St.  Louis.  https://brownschool.wustl.edu/News/Pages/ Brown-School-Connects-Artificial-Intelligence-to-Social-Work,-Public-Health-Through-Open-Classroom-andNew-Courses.aspx
- Columbia Center for Teaching and Learning. (n.d.). Considerations for AI tools in the classroom .  https://ctl.columbia. edu/resources-and-technology/resources/ai-tools/
- Cyberpunk Pioneer William Gibson. (1993, August 31). [MP3]. In WHYY Fresh Air with Terry Gross . National Public Radio. https://freshairarchive.org/segments/cyberpunk-pioneer-william-gibson
- Dali, K., &amp; Caidi, N. (2022). Social work education for the digital age: Insight from information science. In Social Work Education , 1-31.
- Goldkind, L. (2021). Social work and artificial intelligence: Into the matrix. Social Work , 66 (4), 372-374. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/sw/swab028
- Hitchcock, L. I., Sage, M., &amp; Smyth, N. J. (Eds.). (2018). Technology in social work education: Educators' perspectives on the  NASW technology standards  for  social  work  education  and  supervision .  University  at  Buffalo  School  of  Social Work, State University of New York.
- Hodgson, D., Goldingay, S., Boddy, J., Nipperess, S., &amp; Watts, L. (2022). Problematising artificial intelligence in social work education: Challenges, issues and possibilities. The British Journal of Social Work , 52 (4), 1878-1895. https://doi. org/10.1093/bjsw/bcab168
- Kuhail, M. A., Alturki, N., Alramlawi, S., &amp; Alhejori, K. (2022). Interacting with educational chatbots: A systematic review. Education and Information Technologies , 28 (1), 973-1018. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-11177-3  .
- Leopold, D. (2007, October). Socialism and (the rejection of) utopia. Journal  of  Political  Ideologies , 12 (3),  219-237. https://doi.org/10.1080/13569310701622101
- Lieu, T. (2023, January 26). Rep Lieu introduces first federal legislation ever written by artificial intelligence [Press release]. https://lieu.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/rep-lieu-introduces-first-federal-legislation-ever-written-artificial
- Mintz, J., Copeland, S., Crewe, S. E., Klemm, T., McClain, A., Monahan, M. J., Pharris, A., Singer, J., &amp; Teasley, M. (2018). Envisioning  the  future  of  social  work:  Report  of  the  CSWE  Futures  Task  Force .  Council  on  Social  Work Education.
- Nissen, L. (2021, March 4). Artificial intelligence: In what ways does AI turn up in the social work practice ecosystem? An exploration. Social Work Futures . https://socialworkfutures.com/2021/03/04/artificial-intelligence-in-what-waysdoes-ai-turn-up-in-the-social-work-practice-ecosystem-an-exploration/
- OpenAI. (2022). ChatGPT: Optimizing language models for dialogue . https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/
- OpenAI. (n.d.). ChatGPT general FAQ . https://help.openai.com/en/articles/6783457-chatgpt-general-faq
- Parga, J.,  &amp;  Schwartz,  S.  (2023).  Technology  adoption  in  social  work  education. Oxford Bibliographies .  https://www. oxfordbibliographies.com/display/document/obo-9780195389678/obo-9780195389678-0265.xml
- Patton, D., &amp; Cogburn, C. (2019, June 3). Launch of new social work minor: Emerging technology, media, and society (EMS) . Columbia School of Social Work. https://socialwork.columbia.edu/news/launch-of-new-social-work-minoremerging-technology-media-and-society-ems/
- Patton, D. U. (2020). Social work thinking for UX and AI design. Interactions , 27 (2), 86-89. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3380535

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Rittel,  H.  W.  J.,  &amp;  Webber,  M.  M. (1973).  Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sciences , 4 (2),  155-169. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01405730

Robbins, S. P., &amp; Singer, J. B. (2014). From the editor-The medium is the message: Integrating social media and social work education. Journal of Social Work Education , 50 (3), 387-390. https://doi.org/10.1080/10437797.2014.916957

Sage, M., &amp; Singer, J. B. (2022). Technology and social work practice: Micro, mezzo, and macro applications. In L. RappMcCall, A. Roberts, &amp; K. Corcoran (Eds.), Social workers' desk reference (4th ed., pp. 45-52). Oxford University Press.

Sample, I. (2023. January 26). Science journals ban listing of ChatGPT as co-author on papers. The Guardian . https:// www.theguardian.com/science/2023/jan/26/science-journals-ban-listing-of-chatgpt-as-co-author-on-papers

Singer, J. B., Sage, M., Berzin, S. C., &amp; Coulton, C. J. (2022). Harnessing technology for social good. In R. P. Barth &amp; T. I. Herrenkohl (Eds.), Grand challenges for social work and society (2nd ed., pp. 230-256). Oxford University Press. Steiner, C. (2013). Automate this: how algorithms took over our markets, our jobs, and the world . Portfolio.

Tambe, M., &amp; Rice, E. (Eds.). (2018).

Artificial intelligence and social work

. Cambridge University Press.

USC Center for AI in Society. (n.d.). Our mission .  USC University of Southern California. https://cais.usc.edu/about/ mission-statement/

Zaidi, L. (2020). The only three trends that matter: A minimum specification for future-proofing. Journal of Futures Studies , 25 (2), 95-102. https://doi.org/10.6531/JFS.202003\_24(3).0002