---
source_file: Sperling_2024_In_search_of_artificial_intelligence_(AI).pdf
conversion_date: 2026-02-03T09:24:48.343660
converter: docling
quality_score: 95
---

<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Computers and Education Open

journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-and-education-open

## In search of artificial intelligence (AI) literacy in teacher education: A scoping review

Katarina Sperling a,* , Carl-Johan Stenberg a , Cormac McGrath b , Anna Åkerfeldt c , Fredrik Heintz d , Linn ´ ea Stenliden a

- a Department of Behavioural Sciences and Learning, Link ¨ oping University, Norrk ¨ oping 601 74, Sweden
- b Department of Education, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
- c Department of Teaching and Learning, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
- d Department of Computer and Information Science, Link ¨ oping University, Link ¨ oping, Sweden

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: AI education Professional development Teacher training Aristoteles AI readiness Pre-service teachers

## Introduction

Member states should invest in the level of literacy on AI with the general public  through  robust  awareness  raising,  training,  and  education  efforts, including (in particular) in schools. This should not be limited to education on the workings of AI, but also its potential impact -positive and negative -on human rights. (Council of Europe, Commissioner for Human Rights, 2019: 14)

AI literacy has recently emerged in a landscape rich with a variety of literacies  [1,2],  necessitated  by  the  pervasive  presence  of  AI  in contemporary society. As exemplified by the introductory quote from the Council of Europe, AI literacy is driven by a democratic imperative

* Corresponding author. E-mail address: katarina.sperling@liu.se (K. Sperling).

## A B S T R A C T

Artificial  intelligence  (AI)  literacy  has  recently  emerged  on  the  educational  agenda  raising  expectations  on teachers ' and  teacher  educators ' professional  knowledge.  This  scoping  review  examines  how  the  scientific literature conceptualises AI literacy in relation to teachers ' different forms of professional knowledge relevant for Teacher Education (TE). The search strategy included papers and proceedings from 2000 to 2023 related to AI literacy and TE as well as the intersection of AI and teaching. Thirty-four papers were included in the analysis. The Aristotelian concepts episteme (theoretical-scientific knowledge), techne (practical-productive knowledge), and phronesis (professional  judgement)  were  used  as  a  lens  to  capture  implicit  and  explicit  dimensions  of teachers ' professional knowledge. Results indicate that AI literacy is a globally emerging research topic in education but almost absent in the context of TE. The literature covers many different topics and draws on different methodological  approaches.  Computer  science  and  exploratory  teaching  approaches  influence  the  type  of epistemic,  practical,  and  ethical  knowledge.  Currently,  teachers ' professional  knowledge  is  not  broadly addressed or captured in the research. Questions of ethics are predominantly addressed as a matter of understanding technical configurations of data-driven AI technologies. Teachers ' practical knowledge tends to translate into the adoption of digital resources for teaching about AI or the integration of AI EdTech into teaching. By identifying several research gaps, particularly concerning teachers ' practical and ethical knowledge, this paper adds to a more comprehensive understanding of AI literacy in teaching and can contribute to a more wellinformed AI literacy education in TE as well as laying the ground for future research related to teachers ' professional knowledge.

to enhance the knowledge of what AI is and its societal consequences, as well as by individuals lacking backgrounds in computer science, mathematics,  or  AI  engineering.  This  imperative  has  become  particularly directed toward compulsory education, putting teachers ' professional knowledge at the centre of the AI literacy discourse. In parallel, the integration of AI based educational technologies into classrooms and universities  raises  pedagogical  and  ethical  concerns,  necessitating  an understanding of how AI operates in educational contexts, both in theory and practice [3 -5].

AI literacy is already being introduced in various national curricula [6 -11],  but  initiatives  to  incorporate  it  into  Teacher  Education  (TE) programmes remain scarce [12]. Given the growing presence of AI in the

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

K. Sperling et al.

education  sector,  TE  could  play  a  crucial  role  in  preparing  both pre-service and in-service teachers with different forms of professional knowledge of how to engage reflectively with AI in their profession.

Several literature reviews and syntheses have explored AI literacy in various domains, such as K-12 education [13,14], higher education [15, 16], and the workplace [17], as well as with respects to general AI literacy [18 -20]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there exists no comprehensive literature review specifically dedicated to AI literacy in the context of TE. This study is a contribution to the emerging AI 1 literacy field. By focusing on teachers ' professional knowledge, the paper adds to a more comprehensive understanding of AI literacy in teaching practices which could inform teacher educators and teachers education policy at large as well as lay the ground for future research related to teachers and TE. Accordingly, the aim is to examine how existing scientific  literature  conceptualises  AI  literacy  in  relation  to  teachers ' different forms of professional knowledge relevant for TE. We address this through the following research questions:

1.  What is the current scope and nature of the scientific literature on AI literacy relevant for TE?
2. How  are  teachers ' different  forms  of  professional  knowledge  reflected in the literature?

To address the second research question related to teachers ' professional  knowledge,  we  apply  the  Aristotelian  tripartite  division  of knowledge: episteme (theoretical-scientific  knowledge), techne (practical-productive knowledge), and phronesis (political-ethical knowledge or practical wisdom) as an analytic lens. This terminology, rooted in ancient  philosophy  has  profoundly  influenced  the  understanding  of teachers ' professional knowledge in higher education [21] and is reflected  in  qualification  frameworks  outlined  in  European  governing documents (e.g., FQ-EHEA2 2 ). While, in practice, teachers ' professional knowledge cannot be fully disentangled or separated, the Aristotelian terminology, as elaborated in contemporary writing by e.g., Gustavsson [22]  and  Keeling  [23],  has  been  deemed  valuable  in  further  understanding of AI literacy related to teachers ' work. The distinctions between different forms of professional knowledge allows us to be more specific in relation to how AI literacy can relate to the multifaceted dimensions of the  teaching  profession  and  TE,  while  uncovering  blind spots and opportunities for future research gaps. The next section of this paper further points to the relevance of this terminology by examining the developmental trajectory of the literacy concept, and how it relates to teachers ' professional knowledge as conceptualized in this article.

## A plethora of literacies and teachers ' professional knowledge

For a long time, the term literacy has been linked to written text and the ability to comprehend, employ, and express oneself through written language forms that are either mandated by society or valued by individuals [24,25]. However, in recent decades the expansion of digital technologies has affected and changed assumptions about literacy in society  [26 -31].  This  means  literacy  has  become  a  flexible  concept, aligned with both socio- and technical practices across time, place, and space  [28,2].  Hence,  the  concept  inherently  constitutes  a  constantly broadening range of capabilities associated with ICT, media and education for sustainable development, and global citizenship. Accordingly, the emergence of AI literacy can be aligned with the advent of other literacies aimed at enhancing critical awareness and ' new ' competences

1 For the purpose of this study, we define AI as ' machine-based systems that can, given a set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions that influence real or virtual environments ' ([51], p. 16).

2 ' The Bologna Framework ' : Framework of Qualifications for the European Higher  Education  Area  (FQ -EHEA)  was  adopted  by  the  Bologna-Minister meeting in Bergen 2005. See appendix for the full text (Bologna Process, 2005)

necessary  in  relation  to  particular  technological  constructs,  such  as digital literacy [32,33], computational literacy [34], critical digital literacies [1], media literacy [35,36], information literacy [37,2] data literacy [38, 39], visual and visualisation literacy [40 -42], and algorithm literacy [43] . Although there is no universally accepted definition of AI literacy, a frequently  recurring  definition  within  and  outside  of  the  scientific literature has been proposed by Long and Magerko [18], p.2]: ' a set of competencies that enables individuals to critically evaluate AI technologies; communicate and collaborate effectively with AI; and use AI as a tool online, at home, and in the workplace. ' This definition closely relates to the term AI  readiness ,  which  is  often  used  to  describe  the  understanding  and implementation of AI-based technologies in education and beyond [44, 45].

AI literacy initiatives, particularly in primary and secondary education, have significantly increased in number over the past five years (e.g. [10,46,47]). In some cases, AI literacy has been conceptualised as an extension of data literacy or digital literacy[20,48,49]. This view can be found in various national AI curricula for K-12 education, which predominantly take on a technological perspective by covering AI technologies and applications, including techniques like machine learning, and technologies such as natural language processing [50]. However, it is crucial to recognize that AI differs from many other digital technologies in that it often operates autonomously and can adapt according to the  context  [51].  As  a  result,  teaching  what  AI  is  and  does  remains incomplete unless accompanied by explanations addressing crucial issues such as AI ethics, data biases, surveillance, and the potential impact on  employment  and  sustainable  development  [52].  In  an  education context,  AI  literacy  may  encompass  being  aware  of  how  data  are collected and used by private EdTech companies or on what pedagogical foundations AI-based technologies operate and deliver teaching [4], and to teach and act accordingly. To better examine how AI literacy is reflected in relation to teachers ' different forms of professional knowledge relevant for TE, we turned to Aristotle ' s classical division of knowledge: episteme (theoretical-scientific knowledge), techne (practical-productive knowledge), and phronesis (political-ethical knowledge, or professional judgement) as proposed by contemporary scholars in the field of education [22,53,54]. This holistic approach has either directly or indirectly influenced the foundational framework defining knowledge in TE across several Nordic countries, as well as the qualification frameworks outlined in European governing documents [55,23], which also motivates its relevance in this study. Although we acknowledge that this division of  knowledge  is  specific  whereas  teacher  education  is  country  and context  dependent,  we  find  that  the  different  concepts  are  open  for interpretation  and  broad  enough  to  be  relevant  in  many  different contexts.

## Episteme, techne and phronesis

Teaching practice is, to a large degree, directed towards the interests of pupils and students, whether in primary, secondary or in higher education, by guiding them toward what is educationally beneficial [54]. This requires a holistic set of professional components that could be encapsuled by Aristotle ' s  division of knowledge into episteme, techne , and phronesis .

Episteme pertains to knowledge of a universal and generalisable nature,  meaning  that  something  holds  true  in  a  specific  manner,  irrespective of the context, and can be conveyed through language [27]. Thus, episteme can be understood as representing a form of knowledge that pertains to factual and enduring information, such as Pythagoras ' theorem or the definitive conclusion of World War II.

Techne encompasses practical skills acquired through teaching experiences  in  different  subjects,  such  as  structuring  a  history  lecture, motivating students who have mathematics anxiety, designing geography courses or crafting clear instructions for writing assignments [54]. These skills can also manifest as embodied knowledge in which the hand or body inherently know how to perform actions, such as pipetting in the

K. Sperling et al.

Fig. 1. Study selection.

<!-- image -->

laboratory or typing on a keyboard [56,57]. Techne has also been conceptualised  as ' tacit  knowledge ' [58,59],  thus  signifying  a  practical knowledge that is challenging to articulate through words. While techne has been recognized as a pivotal element in teaching, the everyday life of teaching and learning is relational and therefore often unpredictable and uncertain.  A  singular  focus  on  techne  within  TE  carries  the  risk  of oversimplifying teaching practice into a mere collection of techniques and methods [27]. Therefore, teachers and teacher educators also need the ability to make thoughtful decisions when it comes to applying both knowledge (episteme) and technical skills (techne) in their teaching. In keeping with Aristotle, this form of knowledge has been identified as phronesis.

did not have a specific question formulated from the outset, we decided not to conduct a systematic review [64]. Instead, our goal was to identify key characteristics  or  factors  related  to  a  concept,  which  is  why  the scoping review methodology was deemed appropriate [65].

Developing phronesis means increasing the ability to work with the unknown and unpredictable [60]. Phronesis, as a form of professional discernment, differs from techne in that it is context-specific and based on experience. This type of knowledge cannot solely rely on specific theoretical and practical rules; instead, it must adapt to the unique nature of each situation [61]. According to Kinsella &amp; Pitman [62], p.2] phronesis  involves  deliberation  that  is  based  on  values,  concerned  with practical judgement and informed by reflection. This essentially positions phronesis as a moral and ethical capacity to act and the ability to predict [63].

With reference to the above, in this study we understand teachers ' AI literacy as encompassing various dimensions of theoretical and practical knowledge, and where becoming a teacher extends beyond possessing scientific expertise ( episteme) in the technical configuration and application of AI. More importantly the teaching profession centres on the ability  to  pedagogically  guide  ( techne) subject-specific knowledge toward students, all while navigating the myriad challenges inherent in the  teaching  and  learning  process.  Successful  navigation  depends  on upholding ethical principles and demonstrating discernment ( phronesis) towards the unknown in various educational situations, whether when teaching about or with AI. In practice, these forms of knowledge cannot be fully disentangled or separated.

## Method

To answer our research questions, a scoping review was undertaken to map out the nature of the scientific, peer reviewed literature related to AI literacy in TE. Considering the novelty of our research topic (AI literacy in Teacher Education) and the explorative approach wherein we

Initially, our first search focused on TE only. However, that yielded only a handful of peer-reviewed papers, which proved inadequate for our study. Therefore, we expanded our inclusion criteria to encompass studies that focused on K-12 teachers, pre-service teachers, or teacher educators in the context of AI literacy and AI education. We followed the five-stage  framework  for  a  scoping  review  proposed  by  Arksey  and O ' Malley [65], which involves: 1. Identifying the research question, 2. Identifying relevant studies, 3. Selecting studies, 4. Charting data, and 5. Collating, summarizing, and reporting results. This systematic approach allowed us to include papers stemming from various research designs concerning  the  given  topic,  and  at  the  same  time  pinpoint  existing research gaps [66].

## Identifying the research questions

To gain a scientifically underpinned understanding of the emergence of AI literacy in research and identify relevant research questions, we sought guidance from two search engine experts (university librarians) and through multiple consultations with these experts, we devised an effective  strategy  for  capturing  literature  that  pertains  to  teachers ' competencies in the context of AI literacy, specifically relevant to TE. In parallel  with  formulating  specific  research  questions,  we  explored different  search  strategies  and  key  words.  Given  that  AI  literacy  is prevalent within the field of computer science and a global phenomenon,  we  chose  to  include  both  peer-reviewed  scholarly  articles  and conference papers written in English.

## Identifying relevant studies

We conducted two separate searches on 10 March 2023, using the following search query: ( ' AI literacy ' OR ' AI read* ' ) AND (education OR learning) + (AI OR ' artificial intelligence ' ) AND ' teacher education ' in five highly regarded databases: Scopus, Web of Science, ACM, IEEE Xplore, and ERIC. Search limitations were applied to search for the titles, abstracts, and keywords. An initial search for literature on AI literacy in education and AI in teacher education between 2000 and 2023 in the five major databases resulted in 650 records (Fig. 1). As the field of AI

K. Sperling et al.

Table 1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria.

| Include                                                                                                                | Exclude                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Teaching about AI in school or teacher training or TE AI literacy in the context of education English 2000-August 2023 | Teaching about AI outside of a school context Teaching about AI outside of teacher training or TE AI literacy with no focus on education AI as a means to assess teachers Grey literature All languages apart from English Focus solely on developing AI curriculum, without the involvement of teachers Teachers ' digital competencies not related to AI AI as a technology used in TE Literature reviews |

literacy  is  developing  rapidly  and  has  gained  significant  scholarly attention only in the past year, a supplementary search with the same search query and in the same databases as in on March 10th was carried out on 3 August 2023, to identify late and deferred publications. After applying  the  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  and  removing  those already included in the original search, this resulted in an additional 8 records.

## Study selection

All search records from the first search ( n = 650) were imported into reference management software (Zotero). In this process, we eliminated duplicates ( n = 113) and records that did not fall into the categories of journal papers or conference proceedings ( n = 3). We then conducted a two-stage screening process to identify  publications that met our  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  (Table  1).  To  ensure  consensus  on  the inclusion and exclusion of papers, we randomly selected 40 papers from the library for screening by a minimum of the first author and any of the other authors (either author 2, author 3, author 4, author 5 or author 6). Next, the first author screened the abstracts of all remaining records (534) in accordance with the stated inclusion and exclusion criteria and excluded n = 487 papers, for example as articles discussing AI literacy outside  of  the  primary  and  secondary  school  or  teacher  education context. This initial screening aimed for sensitivity rather than specificity, prioritizing the inclusion of papers rather than their exclusion. At this stage, no papers were excluded based on methodology.

Following the first screening, we identified a total of 47 titles for a second-stage screening by both the first author and the second author and additionally either author 3, 4 or author 5. During this phase, we decided  to  exclude  literature  reviews,  refined  our  research  question formulation  and  discussed  relevant  coding  strategies.  Based  on  this second  screening,  we  selected  34  articles  for  further  analysis  in  this scoping review.

## Charting the data

The first and second author thoroughly reviewed all the articles to ensure a robust and unanimous interpretation. To extract relevant information from the studies, a data charting table was created. This table included not only bibliographic details but also information about the study,  study  type,  theoretical  frameworks  employed,  components related to AI literacy within the study, publication type, and the primary target audience. The first and second authors independently coded all 34 studies, and the remaining authors coded a selection of 10 -15 papers each. All authors independently completed their respective entries in the table, and subsequently, these entries were compared and adjusted as necessary to reach a consensus. This approach allowed us to achieve robust  validation  in  both  descriptive  and  qualitative  coding  [67].  In cases where there was a disagreement among any of the authors, a third author was consulted to facilitate resolution.

## Collating, summarising, and reporting results

In the final stage, the 34 papers underwent a comprehensive analysis that encompassed both quantitative and qualitative descriptive analysis and qualitative examination. The quantitative analysis shed light on the scope, characteristics, methods, and distribution of the included papers and grouped the topics into the main themes based on their aim and research  questions.  The  qualitative  analysis  was  conducted  in  two stages. In the first stage, existing themes were identified independently by the first and second authors, in a process that can be described as abductive  [68],  using  the  Aristotelian  concept episteme,  techne and phronesis as an analytic lens to explore how teachers ' and teacher educators ' forms  of  knowledge  is  conveyed.  In  the  second  stage,  which involved two rounds of readings, the authors validated the analytical coding process, leading to the classification of explicit (clearly articulated)  and  implicit  (underlying,  assumed)  dimensions  of  episteme, techne, and phronesis. For instance, explicit techne could involve specific  recommendations  on  how  to  teach  AI,  whereas  implicit  techne could be found in the questions asked in surveys or interviews. Consequently, in studies that did not explicitly centre on a specific dimension, we  were  at  times  able  to  uncover  the  diverse  forms  of  knowledge implicitly  by  delving  further  into  the  findings  or  methodological  approaches. The analytical work and writing process were highly iterative and collaborative, involving all authors. Through extensive discussions that included revisiting the papers, the inductive and deductive analysis, the interpretation of the analytical as well as deliberations on borderline cases, we collectively arrived at a comprehensive understanding of how AI literacy is being conceptualised in the context of TE in the selected scientific literature.

## Limitations

Whilst this scoping review was undertaken as rigorously as possible, it is limited by its search strategy. More than 500 scientific records were screened in five research databases that are large and international in scope. However, grey literature such as theses, posters and book chapters were not included in the review, and articles not published in English were excluded. This approach may have resulted in the omission of valuable insights, in particular when it comes to papers published in other languages. Nevertheless, our primary focus in this paper was to develop a comprehensive understanding of AI literacy pertaining to TE based on literature that is grounded in methodological and theoretical rigor.  Moreover, our exploration went beyond the boundaries of our initial search strategy to fully grasp the contemporary discourse on AI literacy in the field of education. We are also aware of the limitations of our chosen analytical lens, which enabled us to capture certain aspects of teachers ' knowledge but may have overlooked other facets presented in the papers.

## Results

A total of 34 papers serve as the basis for our analysis. In response to our first research question, we describe the current nature and scope of AI literacy relevant to TE as stated in the literature. This section encompasses background details, including publication year, country of origin, and research methods. It also elicits the predominant topics and how AI  literacy  is  framed  within  the  papers.  Next,  we  address  how primary and secondary (K-12) teachers ' and teacher educators ' different forms of knowledge are reflected explicitly or implicitly in the literature, adopting  the  Aristotelian  tripartite  division  of  knowledge -episteme, techne and phronesis.

K. Sperling et al.

## Research question 1: the scope and nature of AI literacy relevant to TE

AI literacy has grown in interest within the scientific community in the past two years, 3 with a relatively even distribution between conference papers ( n = 15) and journals ( n = 19) (Fig. 2.)

Proceedings primarily stem from conferences related to computer science education, artificial intelligence, educational technology, and technology-enhanced  learning  (TEL).  The  most  frequently  featured journals include ' Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence ' ( n = 2), ' Education and Information Technologies ' ( n = 2), ' Sustainability ' ( n = 2), ' Künstliche Intelligenz ' ( n = 2), and the ' British Journal of Educational Technology ' ( n = 2).

AI in the context of primary and secondary education is a subject of global interest, reflected in the geographical origins of the first author of the included papers. Notably, researchers hail from various countries, with the highest representation coming from Hongkong/China ( n = 9) and  the  United  States  ( n = 7).  Other  countries  with  researchers contributing to this discussion include Austria ( n = 2), Slovenia ( n = 2), the, Australia ( n = 1), Belgium ( n = 1), Brazil ( n = 1), Canada ( n = 1), Finland ( n = 1), Germany ( n = 1), India ( n = 1), Israel ( n = 1), Malta ( n = 1), South Africa ( n = 1) and Sweden ( n = 1), Taiwan ( n = 1), Turkey ( n = 1), United Kingdom ( n = 1) as illustrated in Fig. 3. For more detailed information about the origin country of all 34 papers, we refer to the Appendix.

## Topics

The studies can be grouped into six main topics based on the aim and research  questions: Curriculum  development,  AI  literacy  frameworks, Teacher attitudes and (mis)conceptions, How to teach with and about AI, Professional development and AI ethics (Table 2).

Curriculum  development-oriented  studies (1)  focus  primarily  on  students ' AI  literacy,  rather  than  specifying  the  knowledge  required  by teachers and educators [69,71]. Studies emphasising AI literacy frameworks (2) identify different aspects of AI that students as well as teachers should understand [18,73]. Eleven studies address teacher attitudes and (mis)conceptions (3)  about  AI.  They  aim  at  formulating  strategies  for measuring  AI  literacy  or  apply  existing  frameworks  to  explore  the different connections between various dimensions of AI literacy among teachers, e.g., teachers ' willingness to embrace AI in education or their understanding of how AI works in theory and practice [79,74]. Studies centring on How to teach with and about AI (4), e.g., Druga et al. [82] and Wilton et al. [84], focus on the evaluation of AI EdTech. Studies within this theme also concern the application of AI technologies in teaching practice [83,86]. Studies focusing on professional development (5) often promote peer learning and co-design for fostering AI literacy[12,89]. There  are  also  some  studies  addressing AI  ethics (6)  in  relation  to teachers ' knowledge [92,93]. Some of the studies[18,81] cover several of the outlined topics.

## Methods and theoretical approaches

Two-thirds of the papers ( n = 22) are empirical, and the remaining one-third ( n = 12) are conceptual in nature. Among the empirical articles, eight ( n = 8) employ a qualitative methodology, eight ( n = 8) rely on  quantitative  approaches,  and  six  ( n = 6)  adopt  a  mixed-methods approach. In terms of data collection methods within the empirical articles,  common  methods  include  individual  interviews  and  questionnaires [71,12]. Some studies use focus group interviews [75], statistical methods  [76],  or  a  combination  of  these  methodologies  [81].  No empirical studies are grounded in classroom observations. The conceptual  papers  explore  definitions  of  AI  literacy  and  highlights  implementation  frameworks  [20,73],  or  extend  AI  literacy  into  specific pedagogies [83,85] or AI topics related to ethics [92].

3 Our search does not include papers published later than 3 August 2023, meaning that it does not cover the entire 2023.

## Appearance of AI literacy

The concept ' AI literacy ' is referenced in the majority of papers ( n = 23). However, ways to define, operationalize and measure AI literacy varies widely, and just a limited few of the papers [88,20,75] elaborate on what AI literacy is. Such definitions draw primarily on the conceptual frameworks developed by Long and Magerko [18], Ng [48], and Luckin et al. [45]. Although these frameworks are tentative in their approach, and not explicitly designed for various teacher and student groups, they are also employed to chart teacher competencies and attitudes within highly specific contexts [40,69].

AI literacy is also often discussed in combination with other literacies, such as media literacy and digital literacy [70] and data literacy [81,20], and frequently used interchangeably with concepts such as AI readiness [45]; Wa [41], AI education [69,72], and AI thinking [12]. Given the focus of this review, it is important to note that there was just one study, an intervention study with 34 secondary school teachers in Computer Science, conducted by Vazhail et al. in 2021, that explored AI literacy in TE.

## Research question 2: teachers ' different form of professional knowledge

While all studies include some dimensions of theoretical knowledge ( episteme ),  skills  ( techne )  and  practical, professional  judgement ( phronesis ) relevant to AI literacy, we found that these aspects emerge either explicitly or implicitly. This is illustrated on a general level in Fig. 4. To exemplify, studies that explicitly explored epistemic dimensions of AI literacy proposed a clear-cut framework about desirable AI knowledge [18]. However, episteme could also be captured implicitly; for example, in  studies  that  we  have  referred  to  as  AI  knowledge  but  that  were focusing on a different topic, such as professional development [46] or teachers ' attitudes [75]. The distinction between explicit and implicit knowledge as per episteme, techne and phronesis is further exemplified in  Tables  3 -5.  Since  many  studies  cover  more  than  one  knowledge dimension, either implicitly or explicitly, they may appear more than once in Fig. 4. The asterisks preceding each article title indicate the number of knowledge dimensions in which an article appears.

## Theoretical knowledge: episteme

Two-thirds  of  the  papers  ( n = 23)  either  explicitly  or  implicitly mention what theoretical knowledge teachers should possess regarding AI. For the most part, this knowledge appears in fragments, primarily in implicit ways, as illustrated in Fig. 4.

Explicit episteme. The conceptual studies by Kandlhofer et al. [88], Long and Magerko [18], and Schüller [20], offer a comprehensive overview of AI literacy, and among these Kandlhofer et al. [88] focus specifically on AI curricula content for primary and secondary (K-12) teachers. Here, authors introduce a professional and standardised framework tailored for the training and certification of educators and students in the fields of  AI  and  robotics.  Topics  covered  relate  to  the  principles  of  AI, including AI definitions, practical applications of AI in everyday life, identification and recognition of AI systems, fundamental data structures, the basics of propositional logic, the theoretical as well as practical  aspects  of  Python  programming,  principles  of  natural  language processing,  computer  vision,  and  machine  learning.  The  advanced modules, designed for teachers and students with prior knowledge in computer  science,  mathematics,  and  physics,  delve  deeper  into  the fundamental mathematical concepts that underpin AI. Notably, in this framework, robotics and AI are treated as separate topics [88].

Long and Magerko ' s conference paper titled 'What is AI literacy? ' (2020) integrates robotics as one of 17 competencies covering a broad range of topics, including recognizing existing definitions of AI and intelligence, distinguishing between general and narrow AI, grasping the fundamentals of machine learning, identifying AI strengths and weaknesses,  comprehending  representations,  decision-making  processes,

K. Sperling et al.

Fig. 2. Number of conference papers and journal articles from 2019 until 3 August 2023.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Geographic distribution.

<!-- image -->

various aspects of data literacy, insights into how the world is captured, measured  and  processed  through  AI,  the  programming  of  intelligent agents, along with considerations related to AI ethics. Their framework is, to a large extent, based on 'grey literature ' , encompassing materials such as AI, machine learning, cognitive science, and robotics courses in the US.

Similarly, Schüller [20] proposes a holistic framework in which data literacy and AI literacy are merged. The framework targets teachers and students, as well as policymakers and the general public, and expands on the German Data Literacy Framework which in turn focuses on data analysis, statistics, and mathematical concepts relevant to AI, along with computer programming. Here, individuals should understand how data is generated, possess the ability to manipulate data based on statistical principles,  and  have  the  capacity  to  create  and  use  AI  algorithms  in decision-making  processes.  The  comprehension  of  AI ' s  technological configurations is also explicitly stated in various intervention studies, where teachers engaged in training activities were exposed to fundamental concepts and procedures related to machine learning (e.g., [81,

12]).

Particular attention is directed toward ethics as a form of epistemic knowledge,  whether  explicitly  [41,70,92 -94]  or  implicitly  [48,75].

Table 2 Predominant topics reflected in the literature.

|   No. | Topics                                  | Studies                       | Foci                                                                                                                                 |
|-------|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     1 | Curriculum development                  | [69 - 72],a ( n = 4)          | Studies focusing on curriculum co- development - primarily student AI literacy curricula.                                            |
|     2 | AI literacy frameworks                  | [14,18,20,41, 45,73] ( n = 6) | Articles mapping different aspects of AI literacy frameworks.                                                                        |
|     3 | Teacher attitudes and (mis) conceptions | ][6,72, 74 - 81] ( n = 11)    | Studies developing quantitative frameworks for measuring conceptions about AI, AI literacy and willingness to adopt AI in education. |
|     4 | How to teach with and about AI          | [82 - 86] ( n = 5)            | Studies that explore the adoption of AI applications and digital resources for teaching about AI in the classroom.                   |
|     5 | Professional development                | [12,87 - 91] ( n = 6)         | Mapping ways to enhance teacher AI literacy through professional development programmes.                                             |
|     6 | AI Ethics                               | [92,93] ( n = 2)              | Studies exploring ethical concerns and considerations in relation to AI in education.                                                |

K. Sperling et al.

DiPaolaetal.2023**

Fig. 4. The reported implicit and explicit knowledge dimensions (episteme, techne and phronesis) in the included literature.

<!-- image -->

Table 3 Example of explicit and implicit episteme.

| Form of knowledge Appears in the paper   | Episteme Explicit                                                                                                | Implicit                                                                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Example                                  | Mentions the theoretical concept of AI and the difference between AI, machine learning and deep learning [71,20] | Definitions of AI knowledge are expressed in questionnaire; states what students need to know in AI curricula but not explicitly teachers [79,90] |

Table 4 Example of explicit and implicit techne.

| Form of knowledge Appears in the paper   | Techne Explicit                                                               | Implicit                                                               |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Example                                  | Describes the use of certain AI applications to teach about or with AI[83,12] | Evaluations of AI applications; Meta-analyses of AI frameworks [82,73] |

Table 5 Example of explicit and implicit phronesis.

| Form of knowledge Appears in the paper   | Phronesis Explicit                                            | Implicit                                                                                                    |
|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Example                                  | Professional evaluations of AI; discussions on AI ethics [81] | Explorations of practical wisdom through questionnaires; acritical focus on implementation (e.g., [75, 80]) |

Here, ethics is conceptualised in relation to the technical configurations of  data-driven  AI  technologies,  emphasising  the  risk  of  biases  and discriminatory decisions. As a result, ethics are turned into facts that teachers should know, rather than approached as a moral and adaptable way of thinking and acting in response to various unknown situations and contexts where AI is employed or adopted.

In parallel with the epistemic focus on AI ethics, a notable number of papers discuss the need for teachers to comprehend the principles underpinning various AI EdTech to effectively integrate them into their teaching practices [41,45,81,84,91,95]. This knowledge is often believed to enhance teachers ' willingness to  adopt  AI  EdTech.  Thus, teachers  need  to  understand  the  principles  of  where  AI  is  making

K. Sperling et al.

decisions in the specific AI EdTech, where it offers guidance or information for human decision-making, and where it ' s tasked with identifying  and  interpreting  patterns  to  become ' AI-ready ' and  reap  the advantages of AI in educational settings. In contrast, Wilton et al. ' s [96] examination of the AI components within various AI technologies as a means to improve the AI literacy of pre-service teachers showed that many commercial applications do not provide sufficiently detailed information about the data collection methods employed by their AI tools, making it difficult to identify how these technologies influence factors such as bias, ethics, and explainability.

Implicit episteme. In the majority of the papers covering teachers ' professional development (e.g., [86,87,89]) and curriculum development [70 -72,90,91], teachers ' epistemic knowledge is reflected in much more implicit  terms,  often  briefly  referring  back  to  existing  curricula  or frameworks that are not further explained. For instance, in Lee et al. [89], the primary focus was on investigating a professional development model,  rather  than  examining  the  DAILy  curriculum  adopted  in  the study. The DAILy curriculum 4 was designed by MIT educators and encompasses  teaching  resources,  exploratory  teaching  activities,  and computer-based exercises centred around AI concepts, ethical considerations in AI, creative expression using AI, and the relevance of AI to the future.

Epistemic knowledge also resides within the adopted methodological approaches. To provide an illustrative example, the study by Antonenko and  Abramowitz  [79],  which  focuses  on  teachers  (mis)conceptions, depends on a specific understanding of what teachers ought to know. The authors identify certain beliefs as accurate, such as the idea that ' AI cannot operate independently of humans ' and that ' AI technology is accessible to everyone ' . Conversely, they classify other beliefs, such as the notions that ' AI is too intricate for non-experts to grasp ' , ' AI lacks creativity ' ,  and ' AI  will  replace  human  jobs ' ,  as  misconceptions. Teachers ' responses  in  relation  to  these  statements  are  subsequently regarded as indicators of their epistemic knowledge about AI.

## Practical knowledge: techne

In comparison to episteme, techne -teachers ' practical knowledge -is less addressed ( n = 18) in the literature.

Explicit techne. Out of the 18 papers, four directly focus on methods to train teachers, enabling them to feel confident in teaching AI in their classrooms [12,87 -89]. Lee and colleagues [89] report on their ongoing professional development programme, AI Book Club, which aimed to equip teachers with epistemic knowledge about AI and foster an understanding of ethical issues related to bias in AI. During each week of the programme, participants dedicated an hour to independent reading, reviewing AI activities, and watching videos of other educators teaching these activities, and met online for another hour to discuss the materials and  brainstorm  ways  to  adapt  them  for  their  classrooms.  Teachers appreciated this spaced approach, as it allowed them time to reflect, experiment, make mistakes, and ask questions. A crucial component of the programme was the establishment of a collaborative learning environment,  where  teachers  felt  at  ease  grappling  with  AI  concepts collectively.  Similarly,  Vazhail  et  al.  [12]  reflect  on  how  teachers appreciated peer learning when engaging in professional development activities  related to  AI. These involved hands-on activity and exploratory teaching using the programming language Scratch. 5

The integration of AI EdTech in education stands out as a means to enhance  teachers ' instructional  methods  and  simultaneously  bolster their AI literacy. This perspective is explicitly evident in the works of Nazaretsky et al. [81], Ng et al. [94], Zhao [77], Pretorious [83], and

4 Daily -RAISE (mit.edu)

5 https://scratch.mit.edu/about

Yetis ¸ensoy [85], and implicitly in e.g., Akgun and Greenhow [92] and Luckin et al. [45]. Pretorius [83] underscores the significance of cultivating prompt engineering skills among students, drawing from her own experience as an educator applying ChatGPT in courses with pre-service teachers.  Similarly,  Yetis ¸ensoy  and  Rapoport  [85]  advocate  for  the benefits  of  incorporating  generative  AI  into  social  studies  education, suggesting how this can be put into practice.

Nazaretsky and colleagues (2022) explore the role of trust in practitioners ' acceptance of (or resistance to) AI EdTech, and conceptualise AI literacy to ' mitigate teachers ' biases ' regarding automated grading and  to  instil  trust  in  AI  EdTech  as  a  technology  that  can  alleviate teachers ' workload while resulting in a higher degree of reliability and fairness. The paper aims to address teachers ' misconceptions related to human ' super-powers ' and to expectations that AI-Graders ' recommendations should always be perfect ' (p. 920). To provide teachers with a deeper understanding of both the capabilities and constraints of human intelligence and AI EdTech, the authors developed, implemented, and evaluated a training programme revolving around a specific application of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and AI for automating the grading of  constructed  responses  in  biology.  Authors  conclude  that  teachers often exhibit a ' strong confirmation bias ' and hold ' algorithm aversion ' when arguing that automated assessment cannot capture ' the big picture ' or ' read between the lines ' as effectively as humans.

A couple of studies highlight, either explicitly [71] or implicitly [72], how teachers  have  to  transform  and  negotiate  the  content  of  a  predefined  AI  curriculum,  to  make  the  instruction  more  concrete  and aligned with students ' experiences. In line with these recommendations, Henry et al. [70] propose an AI curriculum tailored for children aged 10 -14  that  was  co-produced  with  teachers  and  presented  as  an analogue, role-playing game, inspired by the game ' Guess Who? ' .

Implicit techne. Teachers ' practical knowledge related to AI literacy can be found implicitly within the 15 design considerations outlined in the AI literacy framework by Long and Magerko [18]. These considerations involve  factors  such  as  embedded  interactions,  collaborative  experimentation with AI technology, aligning data with relevance to learners, gradually  unveiling  information  to  prevent  cognitive  overload,  and exploring ways for individuals to programme and/or instruct AI agents. Importantly,  these  considerations  take  into  account  factors  like  age, prior experience, preconceptions, and the learners ' identities,  values, and backgrounds.

In many of the papers, teachers ' practical knowledge regarding AI literacy implies the adoption of digital resources for teaching about AI or the integration of AI EdTech into teaching, and the use of digital resources for teaching about AI is often proposed as the most effective and suitable method for instructing both students and teachers [73,82,86,87, 91]. Although there seems to be a plethora of digital AI learning resources, these are of varying quality, which, may in turn present challenges  to  teachers.  In  an  analysis  of  over  50  AI  resources,  primarily centred  around  hands-on  activities  and  exploratory  teaching  approaches, and originating from initiatives such as AI4K12, CSTA, and MIT AI Education, Druga and colleagues (2022) found that existing AI resources often fall short in adequately addressing the needs of teachers for implementing and customising them in their teaching practices. The resources seldom cater to diverse age groups or varying levels of prior knowledge. Additionally, the coverage of AI is quite diverse, primarily emphasising the technological dimensions of AI related to perception and learning, as stated in the proposed curriculum by Touretzky et al. [12], while paying notably less attention to the societal impacts of AI.

## Professional judgement: phronesis

Phronesis has been referred to as the professional competence based on  values,  concerned  with  practical  judgement,  and  informed  by reflection  in  an  explicit  manner.  Some  of  the  studies  adopt  different qualitative and quantitative methods to measure ethical concerns and

K. Sperling et al.

teachers ' anxieties related to AI [75], teachers ' readiness and willingness to embrace AI in education [40,76,96], the cultivation of teachers ' critical thinking proficiencies [9,96], teachers ' attitudes and self-determination [74,69], and the considerations teachers make when adopting an AI curriculum [71].

Several of the qualitative empirical studies that address teachers ' ethical concerns or reflections related to AI, rarely pick up on these dimensions. For example, in the study by Vazhayil et al. [12], which aimed to  enhance  AI  literacy  among  pre-service  Indian  teachers,  teachers ' concerns or reflections were mostly not acknowledged as components of teachers ' competencies.  The  authors  concluded  that  the  exploratory teaching interventions with Scratch were successful, but as reflected in their  quotes,  the  teachers  remained  unconvinced  that  the  proposed teaching  approach  was  suitable  for  Indian  schools.  This  scepticism stemmed from various factors, including concerns related to internet access,  availability  of  computer  labs,  and  pedagogical  considerations regarding computer use during lessons. Instead of affirming teachers ' professional judgments, the authors concluded that teachers ' perspectives can act as a barrier to teaching AI. This suggests that there exist specific ideas regarding how AI should be taught in schools, and which attitudes  and  values  are  deemed  desirable  within  the  context  of  AI literacy.

## Discussion

This study aimed to examine how the scientific literature conceptualises AI literacy in relation to teachers ' different forms of professional knowledge relevant for TE. In doing so, we focused on two research questions:  1.  What  is  the  current  scope  and  nature  of  the  scientific literature  on  AI  literacy  relevant  for  TE?  and  2.  How  are  teachers ' different  forms  of  professional  knowledge  reflected  in  the  literature? Our findings support previous research [16,18,48], in that AI literacy is a rapidly emerging research topic and term, globally. Even though our study highlights a rise in the number of published papers in journals and conferences over the past two years, it also demonstrates how the term ' AI literacy ' is, with one exception [12], not yet a research focus in the field of TE. More importantly, our findings can contribute to the understanding of AI literacy within the teaching profession and set the stage  for  future  research  within  this  topic  that  acknowledges  the  intricacies and situatedness of teaching. In the next sections, we discuss the findings we consider most crucial for future consideration of the nature of AI literacy, its background in computer science, the related emphasis on digital resources for teaching about AI and AI EdTech in teaching, and how ethics are reflected.

## A computer science centric initiative

Despite the surge in and adoption of ' AI literacy ' in the educational context,  also  in  TE,  the  concept  remains  notably  underdefined  and underexplored in relation to what it means in both educational theory and practice. Our study highlights a prevailing focus on computer science subjects, exploratory teaching approaches, and the incorporation of AI EdTech into classroom teaching. We therefore conclude that the term ' AI literacy ' , instead of being discussed in depth, appears to serve the  specific  interests  of  different  professional  groups,  notably  researchers, educators in higher education, and teachers affiliated with the fields of computer science and computer science education [2]). This is not surprising, as AI at its core is a computer science subject, and discussions on what and how to teach in relation to AI have been ongoing for decades. However, it is important to note that AI literacy emerges from a domain not specialized in teachers ' professional knowledge and the educational context, and draws on epistemological traditions that, to a high degree, may differ from the educational sciences. This can be reflected in, for example, the high expectations that all teachers and teacher educators in all subjects and across all levels of schooling will be able to actually recognize and describe examples of how computers reason and make decisions ([18] p.598) or to have the knowledge to critically assess and interpret data [20]. Furthermore, a significant portion of the epistemic knowledge pertains to what students should understand about AI, and there is comparatively little emphasis on what teachers need to convey about AI or incorporate into their teaching within the appropriate educational context, not to mention the essential requirements for teacher educators to prepare future teachers within this domain. Thus, we cannot help but wonder how the relatively advanced content presented in the referenced frameworks can be made relevant for TE.

## The implicit conceptualisation of AI literacy

The vague and inconsistent use of ' AI literacy ' in the material stands in contrast with the predominantly implicitly reflected dimensions of knowledge  that  teachers  are  expected  to  possess.  In  other  words, although there still does not exist an agreed definition of what AI literacy entails  in  relation  to  teachers ' theoretical,  practical,  and  ethical knowledge, research initiatives assume this knowledge to be of a specific type. These assumptions as demonstrated by our study, are largely implicit. This in turn influences how AI literacy is advocated for, theorised, methodologically researched and, in extension, understood (c.f. [21]). Arguments  suggesting  that  AI ' can  liberate  teachers  from  tedious administrative and instructional tasks, allowing them to focus on innovative endeavours ' [41], are considered crucial ' for the future workforce ' [6], and hold the potential to ' enhance the capabilities of K-12 educational systems and promote the social and cognitive development of both students and educators ' [92], are very common and highlight a perspective that can be described as techno-solutionist [95,97,98].

In a similar spirit, AI literacy is predominantly reflected as something that can be taught, evaluated, and measured independently of the specific  situated  and  work-practice-oriented  contexts  in  which  it  is employed, and where ethical consequences of the implementation and use  of  AI  are  framed  in  terms  of  technical  challenges  that  can  be addressed through better design and development of AI. While there exists  some  nuanced  approaches  that  underscore  the  significance  of developing AI literacy skills to critically evaluate, communicate with, and effectively use AI [18,75], the specific components of what it means to critically evaluate AI often remain unexplained.

The  implicit  conceptualisation  is  also  reflected  in  some  of  the quantitative  studies,  where  several  of  the  questionnaires  used  in  the surveys, and the hypotheses being tested, were insufficiently presented. This points to a need for greater transparency and scientific rigor, and empirical research to gain a deeper understanding of what AI literacy entails in different domains of education [41]. In this regard, we need to point out that even if a significant number of studies in our review were qualitative in nature, no study was based on classroom observations, which in turn provides limited insights into what AI literacy entails in teachers ' practice.

## The focus on digital resources and AI EdTech in teaching

There is a strong inclination toward exploratory teaching pedagogies involving digital resources for teaching about AI (c.f. [99,100]). Such approaches assume that; 1) the most effective learning experience is to have learners collaboratively experiment with specific digital technology  with  their  peers,  and  2)  the  pedagogic  content  of  the  learning experience is identical to the methods or epistemology of the discipline being studied [24]. Building on this pedagogical bias, different digital resources are believed to address teachers ' and students ' AI literacy. Therefore, a prevailing trend is to provide pre-packaged solutions for teachers to experiment with, delving deeper into how these solutions affect what can be taught in the classroom. As put in one of the few critical notes regarding this pedagogical bias, by Druga and colleagues (2022, p.96): these technologies and their designs matter as they shape and constrain what content knowledge can be taught.

The literature also reflects a somewhat uncritical promotion of AI

K. Sperling et al.

EdTech in teaching practices, not considering the growing number of critical studies pointing to its problematic implications related to e.g., the  power  structures  [101,96],  ethical  dimensions  related  to  datafication and dataveillance [102,103], and educational implications of AI technologies in education[104 -106]. Thus, the focus on digital technology in the realms of teaching with and about AI marks how, rather than being tied to a specific body of professional knowledge, AI literacy depends on the existence and use of digital artifacts.

## Ethics as epistemic knowledge

The heightened emphasis on ethical concerns and risks linked to AI systems  is  manifested  implicitly  or  explicitly  in  many  of  the  papers, reflecting the growing research focus on AI ethics as a comprehensive domain [107,108]. However, the papers included in this review predominantly conceptualise ethics in relation to the technical configurations of data-driven AI technologies, emphasising that both teachers and students should and can act ethically by being aware of how biases in AI can result in discriminatory decisions. As a result, ethics is often reduced to an epistemic knowledge centred around data and computational approaches, rather than a moral and adaptable way of thinking and acting in  response  to  various  unknown  situations  and  contexts  where  AI  is employed or adopted. As stated elsewhere [4,52], considering that AI in education involves the application of various types of AI EdTech, the ethics of AI literacy should encompass considerations related to teachers ' expectations,  resource  allocation,  biases,  the  role  and  value  of assessment,  teachers ' roles,  teacher-student  relations,  and  specific pedagogical  approaches  such  as  instructionism  and  constructivism, among  others.  While  teachers ' attitudes  and  (mis)conceptions  is  a prevalent topic in the literature, our observations that phronesis is the least displayed dimension of knowledge, reflects a methodological gap in the literature, as well as crucial research gaps to fill in years to come.

## AI literacy in TE -future directions

Undeniably,  teachers ' different  dimensions  of  knowledge  will  be imperative to how AI literacy will play out in the realms of education. Our literature review suggests that currently, teachers ' knowledge is not comprehensively addressed or captured in the research. More importantly, teachers ' expected knowledge is not what is currently shaping the concept of AI literacy. Based on these insights, we suggest three significant research foci for TE that warrant specific attention. Firstly, there is a pressing need to reach a broader consensus of what the theoretical knowledge  (episteme)  of  AI  literacy,  particularly  regarding  TE  and teachers, should entail. This should, to a much greater degree, include research  from  the  educational  sciences.  Secondly,  it  is  essential  to actively involve teachers in the process of exploring the practical dimensions of AI literacy (techne) to ensure that a broad set of situated professional skills, relevant for different contexts and age groups, are considered. Here, teachers should be involved in the process of defining what  AI  literacy  can  mean  in  their  classrooms,  not  simply  by  codeveloping or trying out teaching resources founded on specific ideas of teaching and learning. Thirdly, a deeper investigation into the implications of AI literacy in authentic teaching and learning contexts is warranted  to  capture  AI  ethics  and  teachers ' professional  judgment (phronesis), as AI literacy, both as a concept and material artifact, is being introduced in classrooms. Already here we would like to stress a situated and contextualized approach of AI literacy, which means that teachers ' episteme,  techne  and  phronesis  will  never  look  the  same throughout  the  entire  educational  system.  However,  making  all  dimensions visible and explicit may bring about a more solid foundation of AI literacy in TE and education in general, one that is aligned with the teaching profession and that serves the best interests of students.

## Conclusion

We conducted a scoping review focusing on how AI literacy relevant to TE is represented in the scientific literature. Based on a screening of more than 500 papers, we conclude that AI literacy is a rapidly emerging research  topic  that  has  not  reached  the  field  of  TE.  Our  focus  on teachers ' professional knowledge helped us to capture AI literacy in the context  of  teachers ' theoretical-scientific  knowledge , practical  and professional  judgement.  We  found  that  computer  science  and  pedagogies based on exploratory teaching influence what type of epistemic, practical, and ethical knowledge is desirable. Questions of ethics are predominantly addressed as a matter of understanding technical configurations  of  data-driven  AI  technologies,  and  teachers ' practical knowledge tends to translate into the adoption of digital teaching resources  for  teaching  about  AI  or  the  integration  of  AI  EdTech  into teaching. Our results points to three distinct implications: 1) there is a need for educational scientists to engage in and define AI literacy in different educational contexts, and particularly in TE; 2) teachers need to be in the frontline of developing the content and teachings methods of AI literacy; and 3) in-situ studies are needed to capture, analyse, and further develop teachers ' practical and ethical knowledge in relation to AI literacy.

## Statements on potential conflicts of interest

All  authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Statements on open data and ethics

Research data can be shared upon request.

## Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process

During the preparation of this work the first author used Chat GPT to check text for spelling, grammar errors and clarity. After using this tool/ service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Katarina Sperling: Writing -original draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Carl-Johan Stenberg: Writing -review &amp; editing, Visualization, Validation, Investigation, Formal analysis. Cormac McGrath: Writing -review &amp; editing, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Anna Åkerfeldt: Writing -review &amp; editing, Validation, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Fredrik Heintz: Writing -review &amp; editing, Validation, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Linn ´ ea Stenliden: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Validation,  Supervision,  Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest

None.

## Acknowledgements

The research for this article was carried out with support of Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation. We wouldlike to express our gratitude  to  the  librarians  Cia  Gustr ´ en  and  Marie-Louise  Axelsson  at

K. Sperling et al.

## Link ¨ oping  University  for  initial  guidance  and  advice  related  to  the search strategies.

## Appendix

| Author/ Year   | Study title                                                                                                                                             | Study focus                                                                                                                                                                                      | Country        |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| [92]           | Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Education: Addressing Societal and Ethical Challenges in K-12 Settings                                                  | Different aspects of ethical issues surrounding AI, evaluating AIEd tools                                                                                                                        | US             |
| [79]           | In-Service Teachers ' (Mis)conceptions of Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Science Education                                                             | Exploring teachers ' (mis)conceptions of AI                                                                                                                                                      | US             |
| [40]           | Teachers ' readiness and intention to teach artificial intelligence in schools                                                                          | Examining what factors determine the behavioural intention and readiness to teach about AI                                                                                                       | South          |
| [74]           | Towards Intelligent-TPACK: An empirical study on teachers ' professional knowledge to ethically integrate artificial intelligence (AI)-based tools into | Developing methods to measure TPACK/AI literacy among teachers                                                                                                                                   | Africa Finland |
| [69]           | education Sustainable curriculum planning for artificial intelligence education: A self-determination theory perspective                                | Using SDT to explore how teachers prepare, implement, and refine an AI curriculum                                                                                                                | China          |
| [71]           | Collaborative construction of artificial intelligence curriculum in primary schools                                                                     | Investigating how creating and implementing an AI curriculum is negotiated with external influences.                                                                                             | China          |
| [87]           | Make-a-Thon for Middle School AI Educators                                                                                                              | Implementing a PD-programme for teachers with a focus on community of practice and Co-design                                                                                                     | US             |
| [82]           |                                                                                                                                                         | AIEd-tools                                                                                                                                                                                       | US             |
| [93]           | The Landscape of Teaching Resources for AI Education                                                                                                    | Classification and evaluation of                                                                                                                                                                 | Slovenia       |
| [70]           | Artificial Intelligence in Education - Ethical framework Teaching Artificial Intelligence to K-12 Through a Role-Playing Game                           | Ethics in AI education Develop, implement, and evaluate a role-playing game aimed at learning                                                                                                    | Belgium        |
| [109]          | Questioning the Intelligence Concept The Artificial Intelligence Learning Anxiety and Self-Efficacy of In-Service Teachers Taking AI Training Courses   | children some basic concepts in AI; Curriculum development. Examining teaching learning anxiety and self-efficacy using MLSE and AILA.                                                           | Taiwan         |
| [80]           | Are Pre-Service Teachers Disinclined to Utilise Embodied Humanoid Social Robots in the Classroom?                                                       | Examining pre-service teachers attitudes toward introducing social robots in the classroom.                                                                                                      | Slovenia       |
| [88]           | Enabling the Creation of Intelligent Things: Bringing Artificial Intelligence and Robotics to Schools                                                   | Developing and testing AI/robotics curriculum for teachers, acting as multipliers                                                                                                                | Austria        |
| [89]           | AI Book Club: An Innovative Professional Development Model for AI Education                                                                             | Developing and testing a PD-programme for teachers and educators                                                                                                                                 | US             |
| [90]           | Engaging Teachers to Co-Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K-12 Classrooms                                                                             | How to co-design an AI curriculum for core subjects and give design recommendations for future curricula development                                                                             | US             |
| [18]           | What is AI Literacy? Competencies and Design Considerations                                                                                             | Defining a set of competencies and design considerations relating to AI literacy                                                                                                                 | US             |
| [45]           | Empowering educators to be AI-ready                                                                                                                     | How to enhance AI readiness in an educational setting                                                                                                                                            | UK             |
| [91]           | A Scaffolding Empathic Methodology in the Robotics Teacher Formation Using Log Book and the BNCC References                                             | Developing a methodology for teaching teachers about AI and robots (PD), with a special focus on methods of feedback to improve learning among                                                   | Brazil         |
| [81]           | Teachers ' trust in AI-powered educational technology and a professional development programme to improve it                                            | participants Teachers ' knowledge and reflections on using AI-grading                                                                                                                            | Israel         |
| [48]           | AI Literacy: Definition, Teaching, Evaluation and Ethical Issues                                                                                        | Reviewing current (2021) literature on the concept of AI literacy and what specific competencies this concept implies.                                                                           | China          |
| [41]           | Teachers ' AI digital competencies and twenty-first century skills in the post-pandemic world                                                           | Identifying challenges and opportunities in implementing AI technology. It                                                                                                                       | China          |
| [83]           | Fostering AI literacy: A teaching practice reflection                                                                                                   | also synthesizes different frameworks and identifies core AI competencies How one can use generative AI as a tool; how to circumvent certain risks                                               | Australia      |
| [20]           | Data and AI literacy for everyone                                                                                                                       | associated with generative AI Mapping out the competencies implied in data/AI literacy. Highlighting                                                                                             | Germany        |
| [73]           | A Differentiated Discussion About AI Education K-12                                                                                                     | some German frameworks and applications for teaching about AI Mapping out different projects and programmes aimed at fostering AI                                                                | Austria        |
| [12]           | Focusing on Teacher Education to Introduce AI in Schools: Perspectives and Illustrative Findings                                                        | Literacy. Testing a PD- for programme teachers; reflections on implementing education with AI                                                                                                    | India          |
| [75]           | Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education: eliciting and reflecting on Swedish teachers ' understanding of AI and its implications for teaching &       | Teachers and teacher educators ' conceptualizations of AI-literacy; identifying problems in implementing AI                                                                                      | Sweden         |
| [96]           | learning Preparing for AI-enhanced education: Conceptualizing and empirically examining teachers ' AI readiness                                         | Teachers ' readiness to use AIED, ethics surrounding AI-use                                                                                                                                      | China          |
| [76]           | Does the Perceived Organizational Support and AI Literacy Affect                                                                                        | A quantitative study examining what determines teachers ' creativity when                                                                                                                        | China          |
| [84]           | Teachers ' AI Instructional Creative Performance? Where Is the AI? AI Literacy for Educators                                                            | teaching about AI. Defining AI Literacy and responding to the need for AIED Understanding and AILE courses. Identifying issues with common AIEd-tools on the                                     | Canada         |
| [72]           | Co-designing Artificial Intelligence Curriculum for Secondary Schools: A Grounded Theory of Teachers ' Experience                                       | market today CO-designing of an AI curriculum for secondary students                                                                                                                             | China          |
| [72]           | A Phenomenographic Approach on Teacher Conceptions of Teaching Artificial Intelligence (AI) in K-12 Schools                                             | Examining teacher conceptions of teaching AI and categorizing them into six outcome spaces                                                                                                       | China Turkey   |
| [85] [86]      | Artificial intelligence literacy teaching in social studies education The road to ai literacy education: From pedagogical needs to tangible game        | Learning with AI in social studies Addressing the need to teach children about basic concepts of AI/ML                                                                                           | Malta          |
|                | design Developing AI Literacy for Primary and Middle School Teachers in China: Based on a Structural Equation Modeling Analysis                         | through a computer game. Misconceptions about AI Using Ng ' s ' four dimensions of AI literacy ' to quantitively examine teachers AI literacy as well as the correlation between these different | China          |
| [77]           |                                                                                                                                                         | dimensions                                                                                                                                                                                       |                |

K. Sperling et al.

## References

- [1] Ilom ¨ aki L, Lakkala M, Kallunki V, Mundy D, Romero M, Romeu T, Gouseti A. Critical digital literacies at school level: a systematic review. Rev Educ 2023;11 (3). https://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3425.
- [2] Tuominen K, Savolainen R, Talja S. Information literacy as a sociotechnical practice. Libr Q 2005;75(3):329 -45. https://doi.org/10.1086/497311.
- [3] Chiu TKF. Future research recommendations for transforming higher education with generative AI. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2024;6:100197. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100197.
- [4] Holmes W, Persson J, Chounta IA, Wasson B, Dimitrova V. Artificial intelligence and education: a critical view through the lens of human rights, democracy and the rule of law. Council of Europe; 2022.
- [5] Sperling K, Stenliden L, Nissen J, Heintz F. Still w(AI)ting for the automation of teaching: an exploration of machine learning in Swedish primary education using actor-network theory. Eur J Educ 2022;57(4):584 -600. https://doi.org/10.1111/ ejed.12526.
- [6] Ayanwale MA, Sanusi IT, Adelana OP, Aruleba KD, Oyelere SS. Teachers ' readiness and intention to teach artificial intelligence in schools. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2022;3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100099.
- [7] Kandlhofer M, Steinbauer G. A driving license for intelligent systems. In: Proceedings of the AAAI. Graz University of Technology; 2018. p. 7954 -5. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11399. DO.
- [8] Kim S, Jang Y, Kim W, Choi S, Jung H, Kim S, Kim H. Why and what to teach: AI curriculum for elementary school. In: Proceedings of the 35th AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, AAAI 2021; 2021. p. 15569 -76. 17B , https://www. scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid = 2-s2.0-85123886761 &amp; partn erID = 40 &amp; md5 = 8018e57cb98ba3a9f479cb1cf335ef83.
- [9] Southworth J, Migliaccio K, Glover J, Glover JN, Reed D, McCarty C, Brendemuhl J, Thomas A. Developing a model for AI Across the curriculum: transforming the higher education landscape via innovation in AI literacy. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2023;4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100127.
- [10] Touretzky D, Gardner-McCune C, Seehorn D. Machine learning and the five big ideas in AI. Int J Artif Intell Educ 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-02200314-1.
- [11] Han X, Hu F, Xiong G, Liu X, Gong X, Niu X, Shi W, Wang X. Design of AI + curriculum for primary and secondary schools in Qingdao. In: Proceedings of the Chinese automation congress (CAC); 2018. p. 4135 -40. https://doi.org/10.1109/ CAC.2018.8623310.
- [12] Vazhayil A, Shetty R, Bhavani RR, Akshay N. Focusing on teacher education to introduce AI in schools: perspectives and illustrative findings. In: Proceedings of the IEEE tenth international conference on technology for education (T4E); 2019. p. 71 -7. https://doi.org/10.1109/T4E.2019.00021.
- [13] Eguchi A. AI-robotics and AI literacy, 982. Scopus; 2021. p. 75 -85. https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-030-77022-8\_7.
- [14] Ng DTK, Leung JKL, Chu KWS, Qiao MS. AI Literacy: definition, teaching, evaluation and ethical issues. In: Proceedings of the association for information science and technology. 58; 2021. p. 504 -9. https://doi.org/10.1002/pra2.487. Scopus.
- [15] Bond M, Khosravi H, De Laat M, Bergdahl N, Negrea V, Oxley E, Pham P, Chong SW, Siemens G. A meta systematic review of artificial intelligence in higher education: a call for increased ethics, collaboration, and rigour. Int J Educ Technol High Educ 2024;21(1):4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00436-z.
- [16] Laupichler MC, Aster A, Schirch J, Raupach T. Artificial intelligence literacy in higher and adult education: a scoping literature review. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2022;3:100101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100101.
- [17] Cetindamar D, Kitto K, Wu M, Zhang Y, Abedin B, Knight S. Explicating AI literacy of employees at digital workplaces. IEEE Trans Eng Manag 2022:1 -14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3138503.
- [18] Long D, Magerko B. What is AI literacy? Competencies and design considerations. In: Proceedings of the CHI conference on human factors in computing systems; 2020. p. 1 -16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376727.
- [19] Long D, Teachey A, Magerko B. Family learning talk in AI literacy learning activities. In: Proceedings of the conference on human factors in computing systems. Scopus; 2022. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502091.
- [20] Schüller K. Data and AI literacy for everyone. Stat J IAOS 2022;38(2):477 -90. https://doi.org/10.3233/SJI-220941. Scopus.
- [21] Bearman M, Ryan J, Ajjawi R. Discourses of artificial intelligence in higher education: a critical literature review. High Educ 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10734-022-00937-2.
- [22] Gustavsson B. Kunskapsfilosofi: tre kunskapsformer i historisk belysning. Wahlstr ¨ om &amp; Widstrand; 2000.
- [23] Keeling R. The Bologna Process and the Lisbon Research Agenda: the European Commission ' s expanding role in higher education discourse. Eur J Educ 2006;41 (2):203 -23. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-3435.2006.00256.x.
- [24] Elley WB. How in the world do students read? IEA study of reading literacy. Int Assoc Eval Educ Achiev 1992. https://eric.ed.gov/?id = ED360613.
- [25] Fransman J. Conceptualising literacy for policy and practice. Adult Educ Dev 2008;71. https://www.dvv-international.de/en/adult-education-and-develo pment/editions/aed-712008/international-reflections-on-issues-arising-from-thebenchmarks-and-call-for-action/conceptualising-literacy-for-policy-and-practice.
- [26] Cazden C, Cope B, Fairclough N, Gee J, Kalantzis M, Kress G, Luke A, Luke C, Michaels S, Nakata M. A pedagogy of multiliteracies: designing social futures. Harv Educ Rev 1996;66(1):60 -92.
- [27] J ¨ arnerot A, Veelo N. Kunskap i 3D '-techne, episteme och fronesis, presenterat som samspelande dimensioner. Studenten skal bli lærer. Kunnskap. Identitet Og Profesjonsutvikling; 2020. https://doi.org/10.23865/noasp.98.ch3.
- [28] Kress GR. Literacy in the new media age. Psychology Press; 2003.
- [29] Leu DJ, Kinzer CK, Coiro J, Castek J, Henry LA. New literacies: a dual-level theory of the changing nature of literacy, instruction, and assessment. J Educ 2017;197 (2):1 -18. https://doi.org/10.1177/00220574171970020.
- [30] Serafini F. Reading the visual: an introduction to teaching multimodal literacy. Teachers College Press; 2014.
- [31] Unsworth L. Multimodal reading comprehension: curriculum expectations and large-scale literacy testing practices. Pedagog Int J 2014;9(1):26 -44. https://doi. org/10.1080/1554480X.2014.878968.
- [32] Bawden D. Information and digital literacies: a review of concepts. J Doc 2001;57 (2):218 -59. https://doi.org/10.1108/EUM0000000007083.
- [33] Gilster P, Glister P. Digital literacy. New York: Wiley Computer Pub; 1997.
- [34] DiSessa AA. Computational literacy and ' the big picture ' concerning computers in mathematics education. Math Think Learn 2018;20(1):3 -31. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/10986065.2018.1403544.
- [35] Livingstone S. What is media literacy? Intermedia 2004;32(3):18 -20. http://epri nts.lse.ac.uk/1027/.
- [36] Potter WJ. Media literacy. Sage Publications; 2018.
- [37] Behrens SJ. A conceptual analysis and historical overview of information literacy. Coll Res Libr 1994;55(4):309 -22. https://doi.org/10.5860/crl\_55\_04\_309.
- [38] Gould R. Data literacy is statistical literacy. Stat Educ Res J 2017;16(1):22 -5. https://doi.org/10.52041/serj.v16i1.209.
- [39] Wolff A, Gooch D, Montaner JJC, Rashid U, Kortuem G. Creating an understanding of data literacy for a data-driven society. J Community Inform 2016;12(3). https://doi.org/10.15353/joci.v12i3.3275.
- [40] Avgerinou M, Ericson J. A review of the concept of visual literacy. Br J Educ Technol 1997;28(4):280 -91. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8535.00035.
- [41] Bod ´ en U. Towards visual literacy in school: interactions between students and interactive visualizations in social science classrooms. Link ¨ oping University Electronic Press; 2023. https://doi.org/10.3384/9789180750233.
- [42] Bod ´ en U, Stenliden L. Emerging visual literacy through enactments by visual analytics and students. Des Learn 2019;11(1):40 -51. https://doi.org/10.16993/ dfl.108.
- [43] Ridley M, Pawlick-Potts D. Algorithmic literacy and the role for libraries. Inf Technol Libr 2021;40(2). https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v40i2.12963.
- [44] Karaca O, Çalıs ¸kan SA, Demir K. Medical artificial intelligence readiness scale for medical students (MAIRS-MS) -development, validity and reliability study. BMC Med Educ 2021;21(1):112. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-021-02546-6.
- [45] Luckin R, Cukurova M, Kent C, du Boulay B. Empowering educators to be AIready. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2022;3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. caeai.2022.100076.
- [46] Lee I, Ali S, Zhang H, DiPaola D, Breazeal C. Developing middle school students ' AI literacy. In: Proceedings of the 52nd ACM technical symposium on computer science education; 2021. p. 191 -7. https://doi.org/10.1145/3408877.3432513.
- [47] Miao F, Holmes W, Huang R, Zhang H. AI and education: a guidance for policymakers. UNESCO Publishing; 2021. https://doi.org/10.54675/PCSP7350.
- [48] Ng DTK, Leung JKL, Chu SKW, Qiao MS. Conceptualizing AI literacy: an exploratory review. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2021;2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. caeai.2021.100041.
- [49] Olari V, Romeike R. Addressing AI and data literacy in teacher education: a review of existing educational frameworks. In: Proceedings of the ACM international conference proceeding serie s . Scopus; 2021. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3481312.3481351.
- [50] Miao, F., &amp; Shiohira, K. (2022). K-12 AI curricula. A Mapping of GovernmentEndorsed AI Curricula . ED-2022/FLI-ICT/K-12 REV.
- [51] UNICEF. Policy guidance on AI for children 2.0. New York, NY, USA: UNICEF; 2021. https://Www.Unicef.Org.
- [52] Holmes W, Porayska-Pomsta K. The ethics of artificial intelligence in education: practices, challenges, and debates. Taylor &amp; Francis; 2022.
- [53] Eisner EW. From episteme to phronesis to artistry in the study and improvement of teaching. Teach Teach Educ 2002;18(4):375 -85. https://doi.org/10.1016/ S0742-051X(02)00004-5.
- [54] Kreber C. Reviving the ancient virtues in the scholarship of teaching, with a slight critical twist. High Educ Res Dev 2015;34(3):568 -80. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 07294360.2014.973384.
- [55] Barstad, K. (n.d.). The Norwegian qualification framework. NAFOL Yearbook 2012, 192.
- [56] Brunstad, P.O. (2007). Faglig klokskap -mer enn kunnskap og ferdigheter. PACEM 10 , 2, 59 -70.
- [57] Merleau-Ponty M. Phenomenology of perception, trans. C. Smith. New York: The Humanities Press; 1962. p. 1962.
- [58] Polanyi M. The logic of tacit inference. Philosophy 1966;41(155):1 -18.
- [59] Wiliam D. Comments on bulterman-bos: what should education research do, and how should it do it? Educ Res 2008;37(7):432 -8. https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/ eprint/10001169.
- [60] Bornemark J. Horisonten finns alltid kvar: om det bortgl ¨ omda omd ¨ omet. Volante; 2020.
- [61] Dunne J, Pendlebury S. Practical reason. The Blackwell guide to the philosophy of education. Wiley; 2003. p. 194 -211. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470996294. ch12.
- [62] Kinsella EA, Pitman A. Phronesis as professional knowledge: practical wisdom in the professions, 1. Springer Science &amp; Business Media; 2012.

K. Sperling et al.

- [63] Saugstad T. Educational theory and practice in an Aristotelian perspective. Scand J Educ Res 2002;46(4):373 -90.
- [64] Aromataris E, Pearson A. The systematic review: an overview. AJN Am J Nurs 2014;114(3):53 -8.
- [65] Arksey H, O ' Malley L. Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework. Int J Soc Res Methodol 2005;8(1):19 -32. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 1364557032000119616.
- [66] Khalil H, Peters M, Godfrey CM, McInerney P, Soares CB, Parker D. An evidencebased approach to scoping reviews. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs 2016;13(2): 118 -23. https://doi.org/10.1111/wvn.12144.
- [67] Cho J, Trent A. Validity in qualitative research revisited. Qual Res 2006;6(3): 319 -40. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468794106065006.
- [68] Dubois A, Gadde LE. Systematic combining: an abductive approach to case research. J Bus Res 2002;55(7):553 -60. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963 (00)00195-8.
- [69] Chiu TKF, Chai CS. Sustainable curriculum planning for artificial intelligence education: a self-determination theory perspective. Sustainability 2020;(14):12. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12145568.
- [70] Henry J, Hernalesteen A, Collard A-S. Teaching Artificial Intelligence to K-12 Through a Role-Playing Game Questioning the Intelligence Concept. Kunstliche Intell (Oldenbourg) 2021;35(2):171 -9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218-02100733-7.
- [71] Dai Y, Liu A, Qin J, Guo Y, Jong MSY, Chai CS, Lin Z. Collaborative construction of artificial intelligence curriculum in primary schools. J Eng Educ 2023;112(1): 23 -42. https://doi.org/10.1002/jee.20503.
- [72] Yau KW, Chai CS, Chiu TKF, Meng H, King I, Wong SWH, Yam Y. Co-designing artificial intelligence curriculum for secondary schools: a grounded theory of teachers ' experience. In: Proceedings of the international symposium on educational technology, ISET 2022. Scopus; 2022. p. 58 -62. https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ISET55194.2022.00020.
- [73] Steinbauer G, Kandlhofer M, Chklovski T, Heintz F, Koenig S. A differentiated discussion about AI education K-12. KI-Künstl Intell 2021;35(2):131 -7. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s13218-021-00724-8.
- [74] Celik I. Towards Intelligent-TPACK: an empirical study on teachers ' professional knowledge to ethically integrate artificial intelligence (AI)-based tools into education. Comput Hum Behav 2023;138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. chb.2022.107468. Scopus.
- [75] Velander J, Taiye MA, Otero N, Milrad M. Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education: eliciting and reflecting on Swedish teachers ' understanding of AI and its implications for teaching &amp; learning. Educ Inf Technol 2023. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s10639-023-11990-4.
- [76] Wen F, Hu Y, Gu X. Does the perceived organizational support and AI literacy affect teachers ' AI instructional creative performance?. In: Proceedings of the international conference on advanced learning technologies; 2022. p. 363 -7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT55010.2022.00113 (M. Chang, N. Chen, M. Dascalu, D. Sampson, A. Tlili, &amp; S. Trausan-Matu, Eds.; WOS:000885102700106.
- [77] Zhao L, Wu X, Luo H. Developing AI literacy for primary and middle school teachers in China: based on a structural equation modelling analysis. Sustainability 2022;14(21):14549. https://doi.org/10.3390/su142114549.
- [78] Wang X, Li L, Tan SC, Yang L, Lei J. Preparing for AI-enhanced education: Conceptualizing and empirically examining teachers ' AI readiness. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2023;146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2023.107798.
- [79] Antonenko P, Abramowitz B. In-service teachers ' (Mis)conceptions of artificial intelligence in K-12 science education. J Res Technol Educ 2023;55(1):64 -78. https://doi.org/10.1080/15391523.2022.2119450.
- [80] Istenic A, Bratko I, Rosanda V. Are Pre-Service Teachers Disinclined to Utilise Embodied Humanoid Social Robots in the Classroom?. In: British Journal of Educational Technology . 52. ERIC; 2021. p. 2340 -58.
- [81] Nazaretsky T, Ariely M, Cukurova M, Alexandron G. Teachers ' trust in AIpowered educational technology and a professional development program to improve it. Br J Educ Technol 2022;53(4):914 -31. https://doi.org/10.1111/ bjet.13232.
- [82] Druga S, Otero N, Ko AJ. The landscape of teaching resources for AI education. In: Proceedings of the annual conference on innovation and technology in computer science education, ITiCSE. 1; 2022. p. 96 -102. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3502718.3524782.
- [83] Pretorius L. Fostering AI literacy: a teaching practice reflection. J Acad Lang Learn 2023;17(1):T1 -8. https://journal.aall.org.au/index.php/jall/article/vie w/891.
- [84] Wilton L, Ip S, Sharma M, Fan F. Where is the AI? AI literacy for educators. In: Rodrigo, M.M., Matsuda, N., Cristea, A.I., Dimitrova, V. (eds). In: Proceedings of the artificial intelligence in education. Posters and late breaking results, workshops and tutorials, industry and innovation tracks, practitioners ' and doctoral consortium. AIED 2022. Lecture notes in computer science. 13356. Cham: Springer; 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-11647-6\_31.
- [85] Yetis ¸ensoy O, Rapoport A. Artificial intelligence literacy teaching in social studies education. J Pedagog Res 2023;7(3):100 -10. https://doi.org/10.33902/ JPR.202320866. Scopus.
- [86] Zammit M, Voulgari I, Liapis A, Yannakakis G. The road to AI literacy education: from pedagogical needs to tangible game design. Institute of Digital Games,
25. University of Malta; 2021. p. 765 -73. https://doi.org/10.34190/GBL.21.155 (P. Fotaris, Ed.; WOS:000758457500087.
- [87] DiPaola D, Moore KS, Ali S, Perret B, Zhou X, Zhang H, Lee I. Make-a-Thon for middle school AI educators. In: Proceedings of the 54th ACM technical symposium on computer science education; 2023. p. 305 -11. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3545945.3569743. V. 1.
- [88] Kandlhofer M, Steinbauer G, La ß nig JP, Baumann W, Plomer S, Ballagi A, Alfoldi I. Enabling the creation of intelligent things: bringing artificial intelligence and robotics to schools. In: Proceedings of the IEEE frontiers in education conference (FIE); 2019. p. 1 -5. https://doi.org/10.1109/ FIE43999.2019.9028537.
- [89] Lee I, Zhang H, Moore K, Zhou X, Perret B, Cheng Y, Zheng R, Pu G. AI book club an innovative professional development model for AI education. In: Proceedings of the 53rd ACM technical symposium on computer science education; 2022. p. 202 -8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3478431.3499318.
- [90] Lin P, Van Brummelen J. Engaging teachers to co-design integrated AI curriculum for K-12 classrooms. In: Proceedings of the CHI conference on human factors in computing systems; 2021. p. 1 -12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445377.
- [91] Minami M, Gomes MAC, Suyama R, Panazio ADON, Takahata AK, Kurashima CS, de Moura FS, Kleinschmidt JH, del Rio de Souza e Silva Junior L. A scaffolding empathic methodology in the robotics teacher formation using log book and the BNCC references. In: Proceedings of the latin American robotics symposium (LARS), Brazilian symposium on robotics (SBR) and workshop on robotics in education (WRE); 2019. p. 435 -40. https://doi.org/10.1109/LARS-SBRWRE48964.2019.00083.
- [92] Akgun S, Greenhow C. Artificial intelligence (AI) in education: addressing societal and ethical challenges in K-12 settings. In Chinn C., Tan E., Chan C., &amp; Kali Y. (editors). In: Proceedings of the international conference of the learning sciences, ICLS. International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS); 2022. p. 1373 -6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-021-00096-7.
- [93] Gartner S, Krasna M. Artificial intelligence in education -ethical framework. In: Proceedings of the 12th mediterranean conference on embedded computing, MECO 2023; 2023. https://doi.org/10.1109/MECO58584.2023.10155012.
- [94] Ng DTK, Leung JKL, Su J, Ng RCW, Chu SKW. Teachers ' AI digital competencies and twenty-first century skills in the post-pandemic world. Educational Technology Research and Development. Scopus. 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11423-023-10203-6.
- [95] Holmes W, Meng S, Yuan L. Artificial intelligence and education: digging beneath the surface. Chin J ICT Educ 2023;2023(2):16 -26. https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/ id/eprint/10176777.
- [96] Williamson B, Macgilchrist F, Potter J. Re -examining AI, automation and datafication in education. Learn Media Technol 2023;48(1):1 -5. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/17439884.2023.2167830.
- [97] Morozov E. To save everything, click here: the folly of technological solutionism. PublicAffairs; 2013.
- [98] Selwyn N. Lessons to be learnt? Education, techno-solutionism, and sustainable development. In H. Skaug Saetra, (Ed). Technology and sustainable development. 1st ed. Routledge; 2023.
- [99] Kirschner PA, Sweller J, Clark RE. Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: an analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching. Educ Psychol 2006;41(2):75 -86. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep4102\_1.
- [100] Papert S. Mindstorms: computers, children, and powerful ideas. NY: Basic Books; 1980. p. 255.
- [101] Gulson KN, Witzenberger K. Repackaging authority: artificial intelligence, automated governance and education trade shows. J Educ Policy 2022;37(1): 145 -60. https://doi.org/10.1080/02680939.2020.1785552.
- [102] Manolev J, Sullivan A, Slee R. The datafication of discipline: ClassDojo, surveillance and a performative classroom culture. Learn Media Technol 2019;44 (1):36 -51. https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2018.1558237.
- [103] Pangrazio L, Selwyn N. Personal data literacies ' : a critical literacies approach to enhancing understandings of personal digital data. New Media Soc 2019;21(2): 419 -37. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444818799523.
- [104] Jarke J, Macgilchrist F. Dashboard stories: how narratives told by predictive analytics reconfigure roles, risk and sociality in education. Big Data Soc 2021;8 (1). https://doi.org/10.1177/20539517211025561.
- [105] Perrotta C, Selwyn N, Ewin C. Artificial intelligence and the affective labour of understanding: the intimate moderation of a language model. New Media Soc 2022. https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448221075296.
- [106] Selwyn N. Should robots replace teachers?: AI and the future of education. John Wiley &amp; Sons; 2019.
- [107] Borenstein J, Grodzinsky FS, Howard A, Miller KW, Wolf MJ. AI ethics: a long history and a recent burst of attention. Computer 2021;54(1):96 -102. https://doi. org/10.1109/MC.2020.3034950.
- [108] Cerratto Pargman T, McGrath C. Mapping the ethics of learning analytics in higher education: a systematic literature review of empirical research. J Learn Anal 2021;8(2):123 -39. https://doi.org/10.18608/jla.2021.1.
- [109] Hsu T-C, Hsu T-P, Lin Y-T. The Artificial Intelligence Learning Anxiety and SelfEfficacy of In-Service Teachers Taking AI Training Courses. Scopus; 2023. p. 97 -101. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICAIE56796.2023.00034.