---
source_file: Tinmaz_2022_A_systematic_review_on_digital_literacy.pdf
conversion_date: 2026-02-03T09:26:49.064047
converter: docling
quality_score: 95
---

## RESEARCH

## A systematic review on digital literacy

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Hasan Tinmaz 1 ,  Y oo-Taek Lee 2 , Mina Fanea-Ivanovici 3 and Hasnan Baber 4*

*Correspondence: h.baber@adsm.ac.ae

1 AI &amp; Big Data Department, Studies, Woosong University, Daejeon, South Korea

Endicott College of International 2 Endicott College of International Studies, Woosong University, Daejeon, South Korea 3 Department of Economics and Economic Policies, Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Bucharest, Romania 4 Abu Dhabi School of Management, Abu Dhabi,

United Arab Emirates

<!-- image -->

## Abstract

The purpose of this study is to discover the main themes and categories of the research studies regarding digital literacy. To serve this purpose, the databases of WoS/Clarivate Analytics, Proquest Central, Emerald Management Journals, Jstor Business College Collections and Scopus/Elsevier were searched with four keyword-combinations and final forty-three articles were included in the dataset. The researchers applied a systematic literature review method to the dataset. The preliminary findings demonstrated that there is a growing prevalence of digital literacy articles starting from the year 2013. The dominant research methodology of the reviewed articles is qualitative. The four major themes revealed from the qualitative content analysis are: digital literacy, digital competencies, digital skills and digital thinking. Under each theme, the categories and their frequencies are analysed. Recommendations for further research and for real life implementations are generated.

Keywords: Digital literacy, Digital competencies, Digital skills, Digital thinking, Systematic review, Qualitative research

## Introduction

The extant literature on digital literacy, skills and competencies is rich in definitions and classifications, but there is still no consensus on the larger themes and subsumed themes categories. (Heitin, 2016). To exemplify, existing inventories of Internet skills suffer from 'incompleteness  and  over-simplification,  conceptual  ambiguity'  (van  Deursen  et  al., 2015), and Internet skills are only a part of digital skills. While there is already a plethora of research in this field, this research paper hereby aims to provide a general framework of digital areas and themes that can best describe digital (cap)abilities in the novel context of Industry 4.0 and the accelerated pandemic-triggered digitalisation. The areas and themes can represent the starting point for drafting a contemporary digital literacy framework.

Sousa and Rocha (2019) explained that there is a stake of digital skills for disruptive digital business, and they connect it to the latest developments, such as the Internet of Things (IoT), cloud technology, big data, artificial intelligence, and robotics. The topic is even more important given the large disparities in digital literacy across regions (Tinmaz et  al.,  2022).  More  precisely,  digital  inequalities  encompass  skills,  along  with  access, usage and self-perceptions. These inequalities need to be addressed, as they are credited with a 'potential to shape life chances in multiple ways' (Robinson et al., 2015), e.g.,

© The Author(s) 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat  iveco  mmons.  org/  licen  ses/  by/4.  0/.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Open Access

<!-- image -->

academic performance, labour market competitiveness, health, civic and political participation. Steps have been successfully taken to address physical access gaps, but skills gaps are still looming (Van Deursen &amp; Van Dijk, 2010a). Moreover, digital inequalities have grown larger due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and they influenced the very state of health of the most vulnerable categories of population or their employability in a time when digital skills are required (Baber et al., 2022; Beaunoyer, Dupéré &amp; Guitton, 2020).

The systematic review the researchers propose is a useful updated instrument of classification and inventory for digital literacy. Considering the latest developments in the economy and in line with current digitalisation needs, digitally literate population may assist policymakers in various fields, e.g., education, administration, healthcare system, and managers of companies and other concerned organisations that need to stay competitive and to employ competitive workforce. Therefore, it is indispensably vital to comprehend the big picture of digital literacy related research.

## Literature review

Since the advent of Digital Literacy, scholars have been concerned with identifying and classifying the various (cap)abilities related to its operation. Using the most cited academic papers in this stream of research, several classifications of digital-related literacies, competencies, and skills emerged.

## Digital literacies

Digital literacy, which is one of the challenges of integration of technology in academic courses (Blau, Shamir-Inbal &amp; Avdiel, 2020), has been defined in the current literature as the competencies and skills required for navigating a fragmented and complex information ecosystem (Eshet,  2004).  A  'Digital  Literacy  Framework'  was  designed  by  Eshet-Alkalai (2012), comprising six categories: (a) photo-visual thinking (understanding and using visual information); (b) real-time thinking (simultaneously processing a variety of stimuli); (c)  information  thinking  (evaluating  and  combining  information  from  multiple  digital sources);  (d)  branching  thinking  (navigating  in  non-linear  hyper-media  environments); (e) reproduction thinking (creating outcomes using technological tools by designing new content or remixing existing digital content); (f) social-emotional thinking (understanding and applying cyberspace rules). According to Heitin (2016), digital literacy groups the following clusters: (a) finding and consuming digital content; (b) creating digital content; (c)  communicating or sharing digital content. Hence, the literature describes the digital literacy in many ways by associating a set of various technical and non-technical elements.

## Digital competencies

The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens (DigComp 2.1.), the most recent framework  proposed  by  the  European  Union,  which  is  currently  under  review  and  undergoing  an  updating  process,  contains  five  competency  areas:  (a)  information  and  data literacy,  (b)  communication  and  collaboration,  (c)  digital  content  creation,  (d)  safety, and (e) problem solving (Carretero, Vuorikari &amp; Punie, 2017). Digital competency had previously been described in a technical fashion by Ferrari (2012) as a set comprising information skills, communication skills, content creation skills, safety skills, and problem-solving skills, which later outlined the areas of competence in DigComp 2.1, too.

## Digital skills

Ng (2012) pointed out the following three categories of digital skills: (a) technological (using  technological  tools);  (b)  cognitive  (thinking  critically  when  managing  information);  (c)  social  (communicating and socialising). A set of Internet skill was suggested by Van Deursen and Van Dijk (2009, 2010b), which contains: (a) operational skills (basic skills  in  using  internet  technology),  (b)  formal  Internet  skills  (navigation  and  orientation skills); (c) information Internet skills (fulfilling information needs), and (d) strategic Internet skills (using the internet to reach goals). In 2014, the same authors added communication  and  content  creation  skills  to  the  initial  framework  (van  Dijk  &amp;  van Deursen). Similarly, Helsper and Eynon (2013) put forward a set of four digital skills: technical, social, critical, and creative skills. Furthermore, van Deursen et al. (2015) built a set of items and factors to measure Internet skills: operational, information navigation, social,  creative,  mobile.  More  recent  literature  (vaan  Laar  et  al.,  2017)  divides  digital skills  into  seven  core  categories:  technical,  information  management, communication, collaboration, creativity, critical thinking, and problem solving.

It is worth mentioning that the various methodologies used to classify digital literacy are overlapping or non-exhaustive, which confirms the conceptual ambiguity mentioned by van Deursen et al. (2015).

## Digital thinking

Thinking skills (along with digital skills) have been acknowledged to be a significant element of digital literacy in the educational process context (Ferrari, 2012). In fact, critical  thinking,  creativity,  and  innovation  are  at  the  very  core  of  DigComp.  Information and Communication Technology as a support for thinking is a learning objective in any school  curriculum.  In  the  same  vein,  analytical  thinking  and  interdisciplinary  thinking, which help solve problems, are yet other concerns of educators in the Industry 4.0 (Ozkan-Ozen &amp; Kazancoglu, 2021).

However, we have recently witnessed a shift of focus from learning how to use information  and  communication  technologies  to  using  it  while  staying  safe  in  the  cyberenvironment  and  being  aware  of  alternative  facts.  Digital  thinking  would  encompass identifying  fake  news,  misinformation,  and  echo  chambers  (Sulzer,  2018).  Not  least important, concern about cybersecurity has grown especially in times of political, social or  economic turmoil, such as the elections or the Covid-19 crisis (Sulzer, 2018; Puig, Blanco-Anaya &amp; Perez-Maceira, 2021).

Ultimately, this systematic review paper focuses on the following major research questions as follows:

Research question 1: What is the yearly distribution of digital literacy related papers? Research  question  2:  What  are  the  research  methods  for  digital  literacy  related papers?

Research question 3: What are the main themes in digital literacy related papers? Research  question  4:  What  are  the  concentrated  categories  (under  revealed  main themes) in digital literacy related papers?

## Method

This study employed the systematic review method where the authors scrutinized the existing literature around the major research question of digital literacy. As Uman (2011) pointed, in systematic literature review, the findings of the earlier research are examined for the identification of consistent and repetitive themes. The systematic review method differs  from  literature  review  with  its  well  managed  and  highly  organized  qualitative scrutiny processes where researchers tend to cover less materials from fewer number of  databases to write their literature review (Kowalczyk &amp; Truluck, 2013; Robinson &amp; Lowe, 2015).

## Data collection

To address major research objectives, the following five important databases are selected due to their digital literacy focused research dominance: 1. WoS/Clarivate Analytics, 2. Proquest  Central;  3.  Emerald  Management  Journals;  4.  Jstor  Business  College  Collections; 5. Scopus/Elsevier.

The search was made in the second half of June 2021, in abstract and key words written in English language. We only kept research articles and book chapters (herein referred to as papers). Our purpose was to identify a set of digital literacy areas, or an inventory of such areas and topics. To serve that purpose, systematic review was utilized with the following synonym key words for the search: 'digital literacy' , 'digital skills' , 'digital competence' and 'digital fluency' , to find the mainstream literature dealing with the topic. These key words were unfolded as a result of the consultation with the subject matter experts (two board members from Korean Digital Literacy Association and two professors from technology studies department). Below are the four key word combinations used in the search: 'Digital literacy AND systematic review' , 'Digital skills AND systematic review' , 'Digital  competence  AND  systematic  review' ,  and  'Digital  fluency  AND  systematic review' .

A sequential systematic search was made in the five databases mentioned above. Thus, from one database to  another,  duplicate  papers  were  manually  excluded  in  a  cascade manner to extract only unique results and to make the research smoother to conduct. At this stage, we kept 47 papers. Further exclusion criteria were applied. Thus, only full-text items written in English were selected, and in doing so, three papers were excluded (no full text available), and one other paper was excluded because it was not written in English, but in Spanish. Therefore, we investigated a total number of 43 papers, as shown in Table 1. ' Appendix A' shows the list of these papers with full references.

## Data analysis

The  43  papers  selected  after  the  application  of  the  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria, respectively,  were  reviewed the materials independently by two researchers who were from two different countries. The researchers identified all topics pertaining to digital literacy, as they appeared in the papers. Next, a third researcher independently analysed these findings by excluded duplicates A qualitative content analysis was manually performed by calculating the frequency of major themes in all papers, where the raw data was compared and contrasted (Fraenkel et al., 2012). All three reviewers independently list the words and how the context in which they appeared and then the three reviewers

Table 1 Number of papers identified sequentially after applying all inclusion and exclusion criteria

| Database                               | Keyword combinations                  | Keyword combinations                | Keyword combinations                    | Keyword combinations                 | Total number of papers   |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| Database                               | Digital literacyAND systematic review | Digital skills ANDsystematic review | Digital competence ANDsystematic review | Digital fluency ANDsystematic review | Total number of papers   |
| 1. WoS/Clarivate Analytics             | 4 papers                              | 3 papers                            | 5 papers                                | -                                    | 12 papers                |
| 2. Proquest Central                    | 7 papers                              | 4 papers                            | -                                       | 1 paper                              | 12 papers                |
| 3.Emerald Manage- ment Jour            | 3 papers                              | 1 paper                             | 1 paper                                 | -                                    | 5 papers                 |
| 4. Jstor Business Col- lege Collection | 9 papers                              | -                                   | -                                       | 1 paper                              | 10 papers                |
| 5. Scopus, Elsevier                    | 4 papers                              | -                                   | -                                       | -                                    | 4 papers                 |
| Total per keyword combination          | 27 papers                             | 8 papers                            | 6 papers                                | 2 papers                             | 43 papers                |

collectively decided for how it should be categorized. Lastly, it is vital to remind that literature review of this article was written after the identification of the themes appeared as a result of our qualitative analyses. Therefore, the authors decided to shape the literature review structure based on the themes.

## Results

As  an  answer  to  the  first  research  question  (the  yearly  distribution  of  digital  literacy related  papers),  Fig.  1  demonstrates  the  yearly  distribution  of  digital  literacy  related papers. It is seen that there is an increasing trend about the digital literacy papers.

Research  question  number  two  (The  research  methods  for  digital  literacy  related papers) concentrates on what research methods are employed for these digital literacy related papers. As Fig. 2 shows, most of the papers were using the qualitative method. Not stated refers to book chapters.

When forty-three articles were analysed for the main themes as in research question number three (The main themes in digital literacy related papers), the overall findings were categorized around four major themes: (i) literacies, (ii) competencies, (iii) skills, and (iv) thinking. Under every major theme, the categories were listed and explained as in  research  question  number  four  (The  concentrated  categories  (under  revealed  main themes) in digital literacy related papers).

The authors utilized an overt categorization for the depiction of these major themes. For example, when the 'creativity' was labelled as a skill, the authors also categorized it under the 'skills' theme. Similarly, when 'creativity' was mentioned as a competency, the authors listed it under the 'competencies' theme. Therefore, it is possible to recognize the same finding under different major themes.

## Major theme 1: literacies

Digital  literacy  being  the  major  concern  of  this  paper  was  observed  to  be  blatantly mentioned in five papers out forty-three. One of these articles described digital literacy as the human proficiencies to live, learn and work in the current digital society.

Fig. 1 Yearly distribution of digital literacy related papers

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Research methods used in the reviewed articles

<!-- image -->

In addition to these five articles, two additional papers used the same term as 'critical digital literacy' by describing it as a person's or a society's accessibility and assessment level interaction with digital technologies to utilize and/or create information. Table 2 summarizes the major categories under 'Literacies' major theme.

Computer literacy, media literacy and cultural literacy were the second most common literacy (n = 5).  One of the article branches computer literacy as tool (detailing with software and hardware uses) and resource (focusing on information processing capacity of a computer) literacies. Cultural literacy was emphasized as a vital element for functioning in an intercultural team on a digital project.

Disciplinary literacy (n = 4)  was referring to utilizing different computer programs (n = 2)  or  technical  gadgets  (n = 2)  with  a  specific  emphasis  on  required  cognitive, affective and psychomotor skills to be able to work in any digital context (n = 3), serving for the using (n = 2), creating and applying (n = 2) digital literacy in real life.

Table 2 Categories (more than one occurrence) under 'literacies' major theme

| Category                  |   n | Category              |   n | Category          |   n |
|---------------------------|-----|-----------------------|-----|-------------------|-----|
| Digital literacy          |   5 | Disciplinary literacy |   4 | Web literacy      |   2 |
| Critical digital literacy |   2 | Data literacy         |   3 | New literacy      |   2 |
| Computer literacy         |   5 | Technology literacy   |   3 | Mobile literacy   |   2 |
| Media literacy            |   5 | Multiliteracy         |   3 | Personal literacy |   2 |
| Cultural literacy         |   5 | Internet literacy     |   2 | Research literacy |   2 |

Table 3 Other mentioned categories (n = 1)

| Advanced digital assessment literacy                                                                                                                             | Intermediate digital assessment literacy                                                                                    | Search literacy                                                                                                                    |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Attention literacy Basic digital assessment literacy Conventional print literacy Critical literacy Emerging technology literacy Film literacy Filtering literacy | Library literacy Metaliteracy Multimodal literacy Network literacy News literacy Participatory literacy Publishing literacy | Social media literacy Social-structural literacy Tagging literacy Television literacy Transcultural digital literacy Transliteracy |

Data  literacy,  technology  literacy  and  multiliteracy  were  the  third  frequent  categories (n = 3). The 'multiliteracy' was referring to the innate nature of digital technologies, which have been infused into many aspects of human lives.

Last but not least, Internet literacy, mobile literacy, web literacy, new literacy, personal literacy and research literacy were discussed in forty-three article findings. Web literacy was focusing on being able to connect with people on the web (n = 2), discover the web content (especially the navigation on a hyper-textual platform), and learn web related skills through practical web experiences. Personal literacy was highlighting digital identity management. Research literacy was not only concentrating on conducting scientific research ability but also finding available scholarship online.

Twenty-four  other  categories  are  unfolded  from  the  results  sections  of  forty-three articles. Table 3 presents the list of these other literacies where the authors sorted the categories in an ascending alphabetical order without any other sorting criterion. Primarily,  search,  tagging,  filtering  and  attention  literacies  were  mainly  underlining  their roles  in  information  processing.  Furthermore,  social-structural  literacy  was  indicated as the recognition of the social circumstances and generation of information. Another information-related  literacy  was  pointed  as  publishing  literacy,  which  is  the  ability  to disseminate information via different digital channels.

While above listed personal literacy was referring to digital identity management, network literacy was explained as someone's social networking ability to manage the digital relationship with other people. Additionally, participatory literacy was defined as the necessary abilities to join an online team working on online content production.

Emerging technology literacy was stipulated as an essential ability to recognize and appreciate  the  most  recent  and  innovative  technologies  in  along  with  smart  choices related to these technologies. Additionally, the critical literacy was added as an ability to make smart judgements on the cost benefit analysis of these recent technologies.

Last of all, basic, intermediate, and advanced digital assessment literacies were specified  for  educational  institutions  that  are  planning  to  integrate  various  digital  tools  to conduct instructional assessments in their bodies.

## Major theme 2: competencies

The second major theme was revealed as competencies. The authors directly categorized the  findings  that  are  specified  with  the  word  of  competency.  Table  4  summarizes  the entire category set for the competencies major theme.

The most common category was the 'digital competence' (n = 14)  where  one  of  the articles  points  to  that  category  as  'generic  digital  competence'  referring  to  someone's creativity for multimedia development (video editing was emphasized). Under this broad category, the following sub-categories were associated:

- Problem solving (n = 10)
- Information processing (n = 5)
- Safety (n = 7)
- Content creation (n = 5)
- Digital rights (n = 1)
- Communication (n = 2)
- Digital emotional intelligence (n = 1)
- Big data utilization (n = 1)
- Digital teamwork (n = 1)
- Artificial Intelligence utilization (n = 1)
- Self-disruption (in along with the pace of digitalization) (n = 1)
- Virtual leadership (n = 1)

Like  'digital  competency' ,  five  additional  articles  especially  coined  the  term  as  'digital competence as a life skill' . Deeper analysis demonstrated the following points: social competences  (n = 4),  communication  in  mother  tongue  (n = 3)  and  foreign  language (n = 2), entrepreneurship (n = 3), civic competence (n = 2), fundamental science (n = 1), technology (n = 1)  and mathematics (n = 1)  competences, learning to learn (n = 1)  and self-initiative (n = 1).

Moreover,  competencies  were  linked  to  workplace  digital  competencies  in  three articles and  highlighted  as significant for employability  (n = 3)  and  'economic

Table 4 Categories under 'competencies' major theme

| Category                           |   n | Category                              |   n |
|------------------------------------|-----|---------------------------------------|-----|
| Digital competence                 |  14 | Cross-cultural competencies           |   1 |
| Digital competence as a life skill |   5 | Digital teaching competence           |   1 |
| Digital competence for work        |   3 | Balancing digital usage               |   1 |
| Economic engagement                |   3 | Political engagement                  |   1 |
| Digital competence for leisure     |   2 | Complex system modelling competencies |   1 |
| Digital communication              |   2 | Simulation competencies               |   1 |
| Intercultural competencies         |   2 | Digital nativity                      |   1 |

Table 5 Categories under 'skills' major theme

| Category                        |   n | Category               |   n |
|---------------------------------|-----|------------------------|-----|
| Information literacy skills     |  19 | Decision making skills |   3 |
| ICT skills                      |  18 | Social intelligence    |   3 |
| Communication skills            |   9 | Digital learning       |   2 |
| Collaboration skills            |   9 | Digital teaching       |   2 |
| Digital content creation skills |   4 | Digital fluency        |   2 |
| Ethics for digital environment  |   4 | Digital awareness      |   2 |
| Research skills                 |   3 | Creativity             |   2 |

Table 6 Sub-categories under 'information literacy' and 'ICT' skills

| Sub-category for information literacy skills   | n   | Sub-category for ICT skills    |   n |
|------------------------------------------------|-----|--------------------------------|-----|
| Evaluating information                         | 6   | Technical skills               |   4 |
| Using obtained information                     | 4   | Attitude towards ICT           |   4 |
| Legal use of information                       | 3   | Use of social media            |   3 |
| Finding information                            | 3   | Intention to use ICT           |   2 |
| Locating information                           | 2   | Beliefs about the use of ICT   |   1 |
| Feeling the need for information               | 1   | General knowledge of ICT       |   1 |
| Documenting information                        | 1   | Use of chat                    |   1 |
| Life-long learning                             | 1   | Use of email                   |   1 |
| Trial and error                                | 1   | Digital text skills            |   1 |
| Dealing with the excessiveness of information  | 1   | Use of multimedia technologies |   1 |
| Dealing with the excessiveness of information  |     | Coding                         |   1 |

engagement' (n = 3).  Digital  competencies  were  also  detailed  for  leisure  (n = 2)  and communication (n = 2). Furthermore, two articles pointed digital competencies as an inter-cultural competency and one as a cross-cultural competency. Lastly, the 'digital nativity'  (n = 1)  was  clarified  as  someone's  innate  competency  of  being  able  to  feel contented and satisfied with digital technologies.

## Major theme 3: skills

The third major observed theme was 'skills' , which was dominantly gathered around information literacy skills (n = 19) and information and communication technologies skills (n = 18). Table 5 demonstrates the categories with more than one occurrence.

Table 6 summarizes the sub-categories of the two most frequent categories of 'skills' major theme. The information literacy skills  noticeably  concentrate  on  the  steps  of information processing; evaluation (n = 6), utilization (n = 4), finding (n = 3), locating (n = 2) information. Moreover, the importance of trial/error process, being a lifelong learner, feeling a need for information and so forth were evidently listed under this sub-category. On the other hand, ICT skills were grouped around cognitive and affective domains. For instance, while technical skills in general and use of social media, coding, multimedia, chat or emailing in specific were reported in cognitive domain,

attitude, intention, and belief towards ICT were mentioned as the elements of affective domain.

Communication skills (n = 9) were multi-dimensional for different societies, cultures, and globalized contexts, requiring linguistic skills. Collaboration skills (n = 9)  are  also recurrently cited with an explicit emphasis for virtual platforms.

'Ethics  for  digital  environment'  encapsulated  ethical  use  of  information  (n = 4)  and different  technologies  (n = 2),  knowing  digital  laws  (n = 2)  and  responsibilities  (n = 2) in along with digital rights and obligations (n = 1), having digital awareness (n = 1), following digital etiquettes (n = 1), treating other people with respect (n = 1) including no cyber-bullying (n = 1) and no stealing or damaging other people (n = 1).

'Social  intelligence'  related  to  understanding  digital  culture  (n = 1),  the  concept  of digital  exclusion  (n = 1)  and  digital  divide  (n = 3).  'Research  skills'  were  detailed  with searching academic information (n = 3) on databases such as Web of Science and Scopus (n = 2) and their citation, summarization, and quotation (n = 2).

'Digital  fluency'  involved  digital  access  (n = 2)  by  using  different  software  and  hardware (n = 2)  in  online  platforms (n = 1)  or  communication tools (n = 1)  or  within programming  environments  (n = 1).  Digital  fluency  also  underlined  following  recent technological advancements (n = 1)  and knowledge (n = 1)  including digital health and wellness (n = 1) dimension.

'Digital teaching' was described as a skill (n = 2) in Table 4 whereas it was also labelled as a competence (n = 1)  as  shown  in  Table  3.  Similarly,  while  learning  to  learn  (n = 1) was  coined  under  competencies  in  Table  3,  digital  learning  (n = 2,  T able  4)  and  lifelong learning (n = 1,  T able  5)  were stated as learning related skills. Moreover, learning was used with the following three terms: learning readiness (n = 1), self-paced learning (n = 1) and learning flexibility (n = 1).

Table 7 shows other categories listed below the 'skills' major theme. The list covers not only the software such as GIS, text mining, mapping, or bibliometric analysis programs but also the conceptual skills such as the fourth industrial revolution and information management.

## Major theme 4: thinking

The last identified major theme was the different types of 'thinking' . As Table 8 shows, 'critical thinking' was the most frequent thinking category (n = 4). Except computational thinking, the other categories were not detailed.

Table 7 Categories (one-time occurrence) under 'skills' major theme

| Category                   | Category                    | Category                            |
|----------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| Digital connectivity skill | Culture transformation      | Text mining                         |
| Digital systems skill      | Readiness to Industry 4.0   | GIS (geographic information system) |
| Re(design) skill           | Internet of Things (IoT)    | Bibliometric analysis               |
| Digital readiness          | Technology-human adaptation | Mapping                             |
| Digital commerce           | Information management      |                                     |

Table 8 Categories under 'thinking' major theme

| Category               |   n | Category                   |   n |
|------------------------|-----|----------------------------|-----|
| Critical thinking      |   4 | System thinking            |   1 |
| Computational thinking |   3 | Interdisciplinary thinking |   1 |
| Analytical thinking    |   1 | Purposeful thinking        |   1 |
| Innovative thinking    |   1 | Quick thinking             |   1 |

Computational thinking (n = 3)  was associated with the general logic of how a computer works and sub-categorized into the following steps; construction of the problem (n = 3), abstraction (n = 1), disintegration of the problem (n = 2), data collection, (n = 2), data analysis (n = 2), algorithmic design (n = 2), parallelization &amp; iteration (n = 1), automation (n = 1), generalization (n = 1), and evaluation (n = 2).

A transversal analysis of digital literacy categories reveals the following fields of digital literacy application:

- Technological advancement (IT, ICT, Industry 4.0, IoT, text mining, GIS, bibliometric analysis, mapping data, technology, AI, big data)
- Networking (Internet, web, connectivity, network, safety)
- Information (media, news, communication)
- Creative-cultural industries (culture, publishing, film, TV, leisure, content creation)
- Academia (research, documentation, library)
- Citizenship (participation, society, social intelligence, awareness, politics, rights, legal use, ethics)
- Education (life skills, problem solving, teaching, learning, education, lifelong learning)
- Professional  life  (work,  teamwork,  collaboration,  economy,  commerce,  leadership, decision making)
- Personal level (critical thinking, evaluation, analytical thinking, innovative thinking)

## Discussion

This systematic review on digital literacy concentrated on forty-three articles from the databases  of  WoS/Clarivate  Analytics,  Proquest  Central,  Emerald  Management  Journals, Jstor Business College Collections and Scopus/Elsevier. The initial results revealed that there is an increasing trend on digital literacy focused academic papers. Research work in digital literacy is critical in a context of disruptive digital business, and more recently, the pandemic-triggered accelerated digitalisation (Beaunoyer, Dupéré &amp; Guitton, 2020; Sousa &amp; Rocha 2019). Moreover, most of these papers were employing qualitative research methods. The raw data of these articles were analysed qualitatively using systematic literature review to reveal major themes and categories. Four major themes that appeared are: digital literacy, digital competencies, digital skills and thinking.

Whereas the mainstream literature describes digital literacy as a set of photo-visual, real-time, information, branching, reproduction and social-emotional thinking (EshetAlkalai, 2012) or as a set of precise specific operations, i.e., finding, consuming, creating,

communicating and sharing digital content (Heitin, 2016), this study reveals that digital literacy  revolves  around  and  is  in  connection  with  the  concepts  of  computer  literacy, media literacy, cultural literacy or disciplinary literacy. In other words, the present systematic review indicates that digital literacy is far broader than specific tasks, englobing the entire sphere of computer operation and media use in a cultural context.

The digital competence yardstick, DigComp (Carretero, Vuorikari &amp; Punie, 2017) suggests that the main digital competencies cover information and data literacy, communication and collaboration, digital content creation, safety, and problem solving. Similarly, the findings of this research place digital competencies in relation to problem solving, safety,  information  processing,  content  creation  and  communication.  Therefore,  the findings of the systematic literature review are, to a large extent, in line with the existing framework used in the European Union.

The  investigation  of  the  main  keywords  associated  with  digital  skills  has  revealed that information literacy, ICT, communication, collaboration, digital content creation, research and decision-making skill are the most representative. In a structured way, the existing literature groups these skills in technological, cognitive, and social (Ng, 2012)  or,  more  extensively,  into  operational,  formal,  information  Internet,  strategic, communication and content creation (van Dijk &amp; van Deursen, 2014). In time, the literature  has  become  richer  in  frameworks,  and  prolific  authors  have  improved  their results. As such, more recent research (vaan Laar et al., 2017) use the following categories: technical, information management, communication, collaboration, creativity, critical thinking, and problem solving.

Whereas  digital  thinking  was  observed  to  be  mostly  related  with  critical  thinking and  computational  thinking,  DigComp  connects  it  with  critical  thinking,  creativity, and innovation, on the one hand, and researchers highlight fake news, misinformation, cybersecurity, and echo chambers as exponents of digital thinking, on the other hand (Sulzer, 2018; Puig, Blanco-Anaya &amp; Perez-Maceira, 2021).

## Conclusion

This systematic review research study looks ahead to offer an initial step and guideline for the development of a more contemporary digital literacy framework including digital literacy major themes and factors. The researchers provide the following recommendations for both researchers and practitioners.

## Recommendations for prospective research

By considering the major qualitative research trend, it seems apparent that more quantitative research-oriented studies are needed. Although it requires more effort and time, mixed method studies will help understand digital literacy holistically.

As digital literacy is an umbrella term for many different technologies, specific case studies need be designed, such as digital literacy for artificial intelligence or digital literacy for drones' usage.

Digital  literacy  affects  different  areas  of  human  lives,  such  as  education,  business, health, governance, and so forth. Therefore, different case studies could be carried out for each of these unique dimensions of our lives. For instance, it is worth investigating

the role of digital literacy on lifelong learning in particular, and on education in general, as well as the digital upskilling effects on the labour market flexibility.

Further experimental studies on digital literacy are necessary to realize how certain variables (for instance, age, gender, socioeconomic status, cognitive abilities, etc.) affect this concept overtly or covertly. Moreover, the digital divide issue needs to be analysed through the lens of its main determinants.

New bibliometric analysis method can be implemented on digital literacy documents to reveal more information on how these works are related or centred on what major topic. This visual approach will assist to realize the big picture within the digital literacy framework.

## Recommendations for practitioners

The digital literacy stakeholders, policymakers in education and managers in private organizations, need to be aware that there are many dimensions and variables regarding the implementation of digital literacy. In that case, stakeholders must comprehend their beneficiaries or the participants more deeply to increase the effect of digital literacy related activities. For example, critical thinking and problem-solving skills and abilities  are  mentioned to affect digital literacy. Hence, stakeholders have to initially understand  whether  the  participants  have  enough  entry  level  critical  thinking  and problem solving.

Development of digital literacy for different groups of people requires more energy, since each group might require a different set of skills, abilities, or competencies. Hence, different subject matter experts, such as technologists, instructional designers, content experts, should join the team.

It  is  indispensably vital to develop different digital frameworks for different technologies (basic or advanced) or different contexts (different levels of schooling or various industries).

These frameworks should be updated regularly as digital fields are evolving rapidly. Every year, committees should gather around to understand new technological trends and decide whether they should address the changes into their frameworks.

Understanding digital literacy in a thorough manner can enable decision makers to correctly implement and apply policies addressing the digital divide that is reflected onto various aspects of life, e.g., health, employment, education, especially in turbulent times such as the COVID-19 pandemic is.

Lastly,  it  is  also  essential  to  state  the  study  limitations.  This  study  is  limited  to  the analysis of a certain number of papers, obtained from using the selected keywords and databases. Therefore, an extension can be made by adding other keywords and searching other databases.

## Appendix A

See Table 9.

Table 9 List of papers (n = 43) included in the qualitative analysis-ordered alphabetically by title

## Journal/Book

Title

## # Author and year

English Teaching: Practice and Critique

(Re)conceptualizing digital literacies before and after the elec-

1 Sulzer, M. A. (2018)

tion of Trump

Discourse and Communication for Sustainable Education

21st Century Skills for Sustainable Education: Prediction Level

2 Gunduzalp, S. (2021)

of Teachers' Information Literacy Skills on Their Digital Literacy

Skills

Informatics in Education

A Model for Developing Computational Thinking Skills

3 Palts, T., Pedaste, M. (2020)

Cambridge Journal of Education

A systematic review of research exploring teacher preparation

4 Starkey, L. (2020)

for the digital age

International Journal of Manpower

Analysing workforce development challenges in the Industry

5 Ozkan-Ozen, Y. D., Kazancoglu, Y. (2021)

4.0

Review of Applied Socio-Economic Research

Analyzing youth unemployment and digital literacy skills in

6 Barna, C., Epure, M. (2020)

romania in the context of the current digital transformation

International Journal of Enterpreneurial Behavior &amp; Researh

Consolidating core entrepreneurial competences: toward a

Reis, D. A., Fleury, A. L., Carvalho, M. M. (2021)

7

meta-competence framework

SAGE Open

Determinants of 21st-Century Skills and 21st-Century Digital Skills for Workers: A Systematic Literature Review van Laar, E., van Deursen, J. A. M., van Dijk, J. A. G. M., de Haan, J. (2020)

8

Journal of Educational Technology &amp; Society

Development of Youth Digital Citizenship Scale and Implication for Educational Setting

9 Kim, M., Choi, D. (2018)

Digital Assessment Literacy - the Core Role of the Teacher in a Journal of Educational Technology &amp; Society

10 Eyal, L. (2012)

Digital Environment

Cogent Education

Digital competence and digital literacy in higher education

11 Spante, M., Hashemi, S. S., Lundin, M., Algers, A. (2018)

research: Systematic review of concept use

Computers &amp; Education

Digital competence in higher education research: A systematic

12 Zhao, Y., Pinto Llorente, A. M., Cruz Sanchez Gomez, M. (2021)

literature review

European Journal of Teacher Education

Digital competences for teacher professional development. Systematic review

13 Batanero, J. M. F., Montenegro Rueda, M., Cerero, J. F., Garcia

Martinez, I. (2020)

Business Process Management Journal

Digital competences of the workforce - a research topic?

14 Murawski, M., Bick, M. (2017)

Information and Learning Science

Digital literacies: preparing pupils and students for their infor-

15 Gibson, P . F., Smith, S. (2018)

- mation journey in the twenty-first century

Table 9 (continued)

| Journal/Book                                | Book: Hacking the Academy: New Approaches to Scholarship and Teaching from Digital Humanities. The University of Michi- gan Press   | Social Inclusion                                                               | Compusoft, An international journal of advanced computer technology   | inter- Profesional de la informacion                                                           | The Electronic Library Process, Purdue                                 | Educational Technology & Society                               | Journal of Documentation Computers in Human Behavior                                                                                                       | Book: Integrating The Library Quarterly Revista de Docencia Universitaria                                                                                 |                                   | Journal of Medical Internet Research                               | study Cogent Education Book: Digital Tools in Urban Schools. Mediating a Remix of Learn-     | ing. The University of Michigan Press English Journal   | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     | International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Literacy and                                | the Undergraduate Curriculum                                                                                                        | J. Digital Literacy Key Performance Indicators for Sustainable Development     | Digital readiness models: A systematic literature review              | years of digital literacy studies: A meta-research for disciplinary and conceptual convergence | research on information literacy: a bibliometric analysis 2005 to 2014 | Heuristics andWeb Skills Acquisition in Open Learning Environ- | Information and digital literacies: a review of concepts Information literacy and digital nativity as determinants of online information search strategies | Information literacy and lifelong learning Information Literacy,'New'Literacies, and Literacy Literacy and digital competence in Higher Education: A sys- | tematic review                    | Measurement of Digital Literacy Among Older Adults: System- Review | MOOCs and upskilling in Australia: A qualitative literature New literacies need new learning | No Longer a Luxury: Digital Literacy Can't Wait         | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review | Preparing graduates with digital literacy skills toward fulfilling employability need in 4IR Era: A review |
| Title Wadewitz, A., Geller, A. E., Beasley- | Digital (2017)                                                                                                                      | C., Belur, S. B., Srivastava, R., Houng- E., Miliza, J., Winkler, A. S., Noll, | Hizam-Hanafiah, M., Abdullah, N. L. (2020)                            | M. C., Sadaba-Chalezquer, C., Serrano-Puche, J. Fifty                                          | Global from                                                            | ments                                                          |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           | D., Yurdakul, I. K. (2017) (2019) | Chu, S. H., Choi, J. Y. (2021)                                     | M., Oh, J., Shah, M. A., Riggs, K., Connor, M. (2019)                                        |                                                         |                                                                                                            | M. J.                                                                                                      | K. (2013)                                                                                                  | F., Husnin, H. (2020)                                                                                      |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
| and year                                    | J., Boggs, J., J. (2013) D.                                                                                                         | D., Holst, G. V., Le Quentrec,                                                 | M. A.,                                                                | Martinez-Bravo,                                                                                | R. (2017)                                                              | Figaredo,                                                      | D. (2001) A. N., Yaman,                                                                                                                                    | M. (2014) J. (2009)                                                                                                                                       | N. Pessoa, T., Gallego-Arrufat,   | Kim, K.-A., Kim,                                                   | Calonge, J. (2011)                                                                           | D., T., Hawley Turner,                                  | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             | M. N., Khalid,                                                                                             |
| Author                                      | Mcclurken, Murray,                                                                                                                  | Radovanovic, bonon,                                                            | Soomro,                                                               | (2020)                                                                                         | Kolle, S.                                                              | Dominguez                                                      |                                                                                                                                                            | Buschman,                                                                                                                                                 | Reis, C.,                         | S. S.,                                                             | Santandreu Mahiri,                                                                           |                                                         | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 | Khuraisah,                                                                                                 |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     | (2020)                                                                         |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                | Coklar,                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   | Oh,                                                                |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       | 19                                                                                             |                                                                        |                                                                | 23                                                                                                                                                         | 25                                                                                                                                                        |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         | 31                                                                                                         |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                | 20                                                                     | 21                                                             |                                                                                                                                                            | 26                                                                                                                                                        | 27                                |                                                                    | 28 29                                                                                        |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                | 18                                                                    |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     | 17                                                                             |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              | 30                                                      |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        | 22                                                             |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             | 16                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
| #                                           |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            | 24                                                                                                                                                        |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   | Fosmire,                                                           |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                | Bawden,                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |
|                                             |                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                |                                                                       |                                                                                                |                                                                        |                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                                                                    |                                                                                              |                                                         |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            | Hicks,                                                                                                     |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |                                                                                                            |

## Table 9 (continued)

| Journal/Book Digital Journal of Library and Information Science   | Education Sciences                                          | Journal of Documentation Educational Technology Research and Development      | International Review of Education                                     | International Journal of Educational Research and Innovation                                                                  | Aloma case The Quarterly Review of Distance Education   | A Computers in Human Behavior                          | Informatics IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science                                                          | Journal of Enterprise Information Management                                                                        |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|------------|--------------------------|-----------------|----|-----------------|-----|
| in information literacy: A systematic                             | Future: How to Bring about Professional Educational Setting | technology curricula: a cross-                                                | validation of testing materials for digital skills in a Dutch context | competence of the future teacher: bibliometric productivity indexed in Scopus competence of university students: a systematic | education on information literacy                       | 21st-century skills and digital skills:                | the Face of the COVID-19 Pandemic Europe-Recommendations from a Scoping Review Indonesia and Japan on the twenty-first | role of employees in digital transformation: of digital literacy of employees as a multi- organizational affordance |        | review     | in                       |                 |    |                 |     |
| Title (2019) Research methodology                                 | review Skills for a Working Success from the                | Taxonomy of literacies The content of educational curricular state of the art | M., M. The development and literacy, numeracy and                     | P., Garcia, S. A. (2018) The digital analysis of                                                                              | scientific The digital literature The                   | effect of distance study: Iran The relation systematic | between in Toward century                                                                                              | Understanding conceptualization dimensional                                                                         | review | literature | The Rural Digital Divide | society 5.0:    |    | literacy skills | the |
|                                                                   | E. M.                                                       | (2013)                                                                        |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               | F. (2020)                                               | de Haan,                                               | T.,                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| Pinto, V.                                                         |                                                             | J.                                                                            | Groenestijn, Tubbing,                                                 |                                                                                                                               | Esteve-Mon,                                             | A. G. M.,                                              | A., Morte-Nadal,                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          | (2021)          |    |                 |     |
| M., Bentes                                                        | Olmedo-Moreno,                                              | Braak,                                                                        | J. F., van Bohnenn, E.,                                               | A. M., Caceres Reche, M.                                                                                                      | A., Gisbert-Cervera, M., M. (2020)                      | van Dijk, J.                                           | M., Garcia-Madurga, M.                                                                                                 | B. (2020)                                                                                                           |        |            |                          | J. Andreani, W. |    |                 |     |
| Carvalho Teixeira, T.                                             | Garcia-Garnica, M.,                                         | J., van                                                                       | M., Nijhuis, J., Lam, A. J. A. M.,                                    |                                                                                                                               |                                                         | Deursen, J. A.                                         | M. A., A. I. (2020)                                                                                                    | Abedin,                                                                                                             |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| and year                                                          | L.,                                                         | Tondeur,                                                                      | Segers, van Deursen,                                                  | (2015)                                                                                                                        |                                                         | E., van                                                |                                                                                                                        | C.,                                                                                                                 |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             | R.,                                                                           |                                                                       | Rodriguez-Garcia,                                                                                                             | Sanchez-Caballe,                                        |                                                        |                                                                                                                        | D.                                                                                                                  |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        | J., Renaldo,                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             | Vanderlinde,                                                                  |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        | Esteban-Navarro, Setiadi, C.                                                                                           |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| Author                                                            |                                                             |                                                                               | F.,                                                                   |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| R. S.,                                                            |                                                             | P. (2015) K.,                                                                 | M.,                                                                   |                                                                                                                               |                                                         | Laar,                                                  | Nogales-Bocio,                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| C.                                                                |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               | Keshavarz,                                              |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   | Garcia-Perez, (2021)                                        |                                                                               | Greef, Hoek,                                                          |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        | Kozanoglu,                                                                                                          |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| Silva,                                                            |                                                             | Stordy, Aesaert,                                                              | de van                                                                |                                                                                                                               |                                                         | J.(2017)                                               |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         | van                                                    |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| da                                                                |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        | 41                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| 32                                                                | 33                                                          |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             | 34                                                                            |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               | 39                                                      |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               | 36                                                                    |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
| #                                                                 |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        | Rifai,                                                                                                              |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     | I.,    |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     | 35     | 40         |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 | 42 |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        | 38                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                     |        |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |
|                                                                   |                                                             |                                                                               |                                                                       |                                                                                                                               |                                                         |                                                        |                                                                                                                        | 43                                                                                                                  | 37     |            |                          |                 |    |                 |     |

## Author contributions

The authors worked together on the manuscript equally. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding

This research is funded by Woosong University Academic Research in 2022.

## Availability of data and materials

The authors present the articles used for the study in 'Appendix A' .

## Declarations

## Competing of interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Received: 23 February 2022   Accepted: 1 June 2022

## References

- Baber, H., Fanea-Ivanovici, M., Lee, Y. T., &amp; Tinmaz, H. (2022). A bibliometric analysis of digital literacy research and emerging themes pre-during COVID-19 pandemic. Information and Learning Sciences . https://  doi.  org/  10.  1108/  ILS-  10-  2021-  0090.
- Beaunoyer, E., Dupéré, S., &amp; Guitton, M. J. (2020). COVID-19 and digital inequalities: Reciprocal impacts and mitigation strategies. Computers in Human Behavior, 111 , 10642. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1016/j.  chb.  2020.  106424
- Blau, I., Shamir-Inbal, T., &amp; Avdiel, O. (2020). How does the pedagogical design of a technology-enhanced collaborative academic course promote digital literacies, self-regulation, and perceived learning of students? The Internet and Higher Education, 45 , 100722. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1016/j.  iheduc.  2019.  100722
- Carretero, S., Vuorikari, R., &amp; Punie, Y. (2017). DigComp 2.1: The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens with eight proficiency levels and examples of use (No. JRC106281). Joint Research Centre, https://  publi  catio  ns.  jrc.  ec.  europa.  eu/  repos  itory/  handle/ JRC10  6281
- Eshet, Y. (2004). Digital literacy: A conceptual framework for survival skills in the digital era. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia , 13 (1), 93-106, https://  www.  learn  techl  ib.  org/  prima  ry/p/  4793/
- Eshet-Alkalai, Y. (2012). Thinking in the digital era: A revised model for digital literacy. Issues in Informing Science and Information Technology, 9 (2), 267-276. https://  doi.  org/  10.  28945/  1621
- Ferrari, A. (2012). Digital competence in practice: An analysis of frameworks. JCR IPTS, Sevilla. https://  ifap.  ru/  libra  ry/  book5  22.  pdf
- Fraenkel, J. R., Wallen, N. E., &amp; Hyun, H. H. (2012). How to design and evaluate research in education (8th ed.). Mc Graw Hill.
- Heitin, L. (2016). What is digital literacy? Education Week, https://  www.  edweek.  org/  teach  ing-  learn  ing/  what-  is-  digit  al-  liter  acy/ 2016/  11
- Helsper, E. J., &amp; Eynon, R. (2013). Distinct skill pathways to digital engagement. European Journal of Communication, 28 (6), 696-713. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1177/  02673  23113  499113
- Kowalczyk, N., &amp; Truluck, C. (2013). Literature reviews and systematic reviews: What is the difference ? . Radiologic Technology, 85 (2), 219-222.
- Ng, W. (2012). Can we teach digital natives digital literacy? Computers &amp; Education, 59 (3), 1065-1078. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1016/j. compe  du.  2012.  04.  016
- Ozkan-Ozen, Y. D., &amp; Kazancoglu, Y. (2021). Analysing workforce development challenges in the Industry 4.0. International Journal of Manpower . https://  doi.  org/  10.  1108/  IJM-  03-  2021-  0167
- Puig, B., Blanco-Anaya, P ., &amp; Perez-Maceira, J. J. (2021). 'Fake News' or Real Science? Critical thinking to assess information on COVID-19. Frontiers in Education, 6 , 646909. https://  doi.  org/  10.  3389/  feduc.  2021.  646909
- Robinson, L., Cotten, S. R., Ono, H., Quan-Haase, A., Mesch, G., Chen, W., Schulz, J., Hale, T. M., &amp; Stern, M. J. (2015). Digital inequalities and why they matter. Information, Communication &amp; Society, 18 (5), 569-582. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  13691 18X.  2015.  10125  32
- Robinson, P ., &amp; Lowe, J. (2015). Literature reviews vs systematic reviews. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 39 (2), 103. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1111/  1753-  6405.  12393
- Sousa, M. J., &amp; Rocha, A. (2019). Skills for disruptive digital business. Journal of Business Research, 94 , 257-263. https://  doi.  org/ 10.  1016/j.  jbusr  es.  2017.  12.  051
- Sulzer, A. (2018). (Re)conceptualizing digital literacies before and after the election of Trump. English Teaching: Practice &amp; Critique, 17 (2), 58-71. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1108/  ETPC-  06-  2017-  0098
- Tinmaz, H., Fanea-Ivanovici, M., &amp; Baber, H. (2022). A snapshot of digital literacy. Library Hi Tech News , (ahead-of-print).
- Uman, L. S. (2011). Systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 20 (1), 57-59.
- Van Deursen, A. J. A. M., Helsper, E. J., &amp; Eynon, R. (2015). Development and validation of the Internet Skills Scale (ISS). Information, Communication &amp; Society, 19 (6), 804-823. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  13691  18X.  2015.  10788  34
- Van Deursen, A. J. A. M., &amp; van Dijk, J. A. G. M. (2009). Using the internet: Skills related problems in users' online behaviour. Interacting with Computers, 21 , 393-402. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1016/j.  intcom.  2009.  06.  005
- Van Deursen, A. J. A. M., &amp; van Dijk, J. A. G. M. (2010a). Measuring internet skills. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 26 (10), 891-916. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  10447  318.  2010.  496338
- Van Deursen, A. J. A. M., &amp; van Dijk, J. A. G. M. (2010b). Internet skills and the digital divide. New Media &amp; Society, 13 (6), 893-911. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1177/  14614  44810  386774
- van Dijk, J. A. G. M., &amp; Van Deursen, A. J. A. M. (2014). Digital skills, unlocking the information society . Palgrave MacMillan.

van Laar, E., van Deursen, A. J. A. M., van Dijk, J. A. G. M., &amp; de Haan, J. (2017). The relation between 21st-century skills and digital skills: A systematic literature review. Computer in Human Behavior, 72 , 577-588. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1016/j.  chb.  2017. 03.  010

## Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.